

**Altman on ‘Popeye’**

I really asked to do _Popeye_ because ... why not? A movie is just a fantasy anyway. And it occurred to me that this was a chance to create my own environment, which I’d done in _Quintet_ but it didn’t work with audiences or critics. _Popeye_ was never really a favourite of mine. I mean, I was certainly aware of him when I was very young. I was a sort of frustrated cartoonist myself, and it was easy to draw Popeye, easy to copy him. But I didn’t really understand what I consider to be the social impact Popeye had until I decided I was going to do the picture, then went back and read a lot of the original comic strips.

What I think we’re doing in both _Quintet_ and _Popeye_ is creating a culture that has its own restrictions and boundaries. I dare say that if I took you to some Sherpa village in Tibet, the way people live there and their customs would be as strange to you as the people in Sweethaven. _Quintet_ was a lot more allegorical, because we only dealt with the principal characters, and everyone else was almost zombie-like. But of course that was part of the particular environment. What I’m trying to say is that the environment, the look of the place, the costumes, the fact of the dogs in _Quintet_ or the absence of animals in Sweethaven ... all those things, whatever the rules I set up, are not anything you can immediately identify with. With _Popeye_, of course, I had the cartoon history to back me up. Had I invented the whole thing myself, and said okay, this is a fairy tale I’m going to show you, the picture would probably be  a failure.

It’s not possible, but I would love to be able to show _Popeye_ to a broad audience of people who had absolutely no reference to the cartoons or the comic strips, cutting out the Max Fleischer extract and starting with the storm at sea. What would they think? I haven’t the slightest idea. A few might say,  
My God, this is genius; ninety-nine out of a hundred would probably say this is the silliest thing I’ve ever seen in my life and get very angry. So the pre-knowledge people have of Popeye is on the one hand a help, and on the other a hindrance, because everyone has their own image, and if I don’t live up to that, I’m either falling short or I’ve gone too far.
**Robert Altman interviewed by Tom Milne and Richard Combs, _Sight and Sound_, Summer 1981**

**A contemporary review**

_Popeye_, the movie, seems to have existed for some time as one of those Hollywood projects that generates a lot of interest, speculation and negotiation, but which no one finally can bring themselves to make. The idea evidently came to Robert Evans after he was outbid for the movie rights to _Annie_, and he commissioned a script from cartoonist and E. C. Segar enthusiast Jules Peiffer. But it then passed, more of a hot potato than a property, from one director (Hal Ashby) who moved on to something else, to others (Arthur Penn, Mike Nichols) who didn’t know what to make of it. Popeye and Olive Oyl were signed up (Dustin Hoffman and Lily Tomlin), but they too were lost. It has perhaps become the norm for big studio movies to go through this kind of mill before emerging as thoroughly homogenised super-productions. _Popeye_ emerged, however, in the hands of one of the industry’s alternative-culture directors, and what is most interesting is how the two Hollywoods have found it a mutually happy hunting ground.

Affirmation is the order of the day, not merely because the musical comic-strip is hardly suited to any other mood, but because comic-strips in general seem recently to have become a mine of values once reserved to genres like the historical epic and the Western. _Popeye_, like _Superman_, is about the Creation, in national, religious and individual terms. It begins with the heavens erupting over a tiny figure tossing on a stormy sea, follows him to a haven where he has hopes of finding his lost paternity but which turns out to be suffering from too much of the latter, brings him halfway home by providentially turning the ‘orphink’ into a parent, then reveals that the answer to his problem is also the answer to Sweethaven’s, before making him a final gift of the secret of manhood. Peiffer’s script encompasses this outlandish fable in a wittily light-footed way, skirting all the Oedipal and Freudian traps into which his own strip characters invariably tumble. Similarly, the plight of the citizens of Sweethaven, squirming under the surrogate boot of their absentee dictator, is described in a pixillated fashion, somewhere between a comic fairytale of arbitrary monarchy and more contemporary rumblings of political paranoia.

The mood is summed up, as is much else that is disagreeable, by Olive Oyl when complaining about the ‘ugly’ hat she is expected to wear to her engagement party. ‘I think it’s a conspiracy. Why would they manufacture deliberate ugliness unless they wanted me to look ugly? We find that out, we’ll find out everything.’ Beneath this, however, both the substance and the poignance of Popeye’s odyssey derives much from its uncanny resemblance to _McCabe & Mrs. Miller_. Sweethaven is a precarious outpost on the edge of the wilderness, with a stirring anthem of Manifest Destiny (‘God will always bless Sweethaven’) to boost the spirits of these frontier folk, who also have hymns about more basic matters (‘Everything Is Food’). Popeye is the stranger who turns up on a quest of his own, eventually to find his destiny become part of the community’s. Thematically the parallel serves as a useful underpinning, although other ideas of Altman’s (Sweethaven as a kind of limbo, into which the more human Popeye drifts, to be gradually converted into a cartoon character) don’t really surface in the realisation, mainly because the comic-strip choreography imposes its own uniformity.

With delightfully inexact performances by its principals – hovering between caricature and mime, silhouette figures who are almost human despite themselves – the film is also a useful step back for Altman. It indulges his rambling, home-movie approach to his art, the atmosphere of a family or a stock-company enterprise, without quite the precious indulgence of _A Wedding_ or _A Perfect Couple_. And it certainly puts him back into the mainstream from which he had wilfully strayed with the defiant confessional of _Quintet_. It is a vision of the past – America’s and Altman’s – of the roots of their cultural dreams. In its own idiosyncratic fashion, it works.  
**Richard Combs, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, March 1981**
<br><br>


**POPEYE**  
_Director:_ Robert Altman  
©/_Production Companies:_  Paramount Pictures Corporation,  Walt Disney Productions<br>
_Executive Producer:_ C.O. Erickson<br>
_Producer:_ Robert Evans<br>
_Associate Producer:_ Scott Bushnell<br>
_Location Auditors:_ Richard Dubuque, Tim Engel<br>
_Assistant Accountant:_ Luciano Tartaglia<br>
_Unit Co-ordinators:_ David Levy, Peter Bray<br>
_Europe Production Manager:_ Frederick Muller<br>
_Unit Manager:_ Paolo Lucidi<br>
_Location Manager:_ Robert Eggenweiler<br>
_Post-production Co-ordinator:_ Suzanne Hines<br>
_1st Assistant Directors:_ Bob Dahlin,  Viktor Tourjansky<br>
_Script Supervisor:_ Luca Kouimelis<br>
_Screenplay:_ Jules Feiffer<br>
_Based on characters created by:_ E.C. Segar<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Giuseppe Rotunno<br>
_Camera Operators:_ Giovanni Fiore,  Gianfranco Transunto<br>
_Underwater Camera Operator:_ Lorenzo Battaglia<br>
_Unit Photographer:_ Paul Ronald<br>
_Special Effects Co-ordinator:_ Allen Hall<br>
_Animated Artifacts Created by:_ Cosmekinetics,  Ellis Burman, Bob Williams<br>
_Animation:_ Hanna-Barbera Productions<br>
_Supervising Editor:_ Tony Lombardo<br>
_Editors:_ John W. Holmes, David Alan Simmons<br>
_Production Designer:_ Wolf Kroeger<br>
_Set Decorator:_ Jack Stephens<br>
_Draftsmen:_ Lester Smith, Stephen Bream<br>
_Property Master:_ Stephen Altman<br>
_Construction Co-ordinator:_ Stéphane Reichel<br>
_Costume Designer:_ Scott Bushnell<br>
_Wardrobe Supervisor:_ John Hay<br>
_Make-up Supervisor:_ Giancarlo Del Brocco<br>
_Make-up Artist:_ Alfredo Tiberi<br>
_Chief Hairdresser:_ Maria Teresa Corridoni<br>
_Hairdressers:_ Aldo Signoretti, Gabriella Borzelli<br>
_Title Design:_ Patty Ryan<br>
_Opticals:_ Cinema Research Corporation<br>
_Music and Lyrics by:_ Harry Nilsson<br>
_Additional Music:_ Tom Pierson<br>
_Music Performance:_ The Falcons<br>
_Songs Arranged and Conducted by:_  Van Dyke Parks<br>
_Supervising Music Editor:_ Ted Whitfield<br>
_Music Editor:_ Richard Whitfield<br>
_Music Re-recording Mixer:_ Dan Wallin<br>
_Dance Choreography:_ Sharon Kinney<br>
_Circus Choreography:_ Hovey Burgess<br>
_Mr. Williams’ Dance Style Created by:_ Lou Wills<br>
_Sound:_ Bob Gravenor<br>
_Recordist:_ Doug Shulman<br>
_Boom Man:_ Don Merritt<br>
_Supervising Re-recording Mixer:_ Michael Minkler<br>
_Re-recording Engineer:_ Steven Brimmer<br>
_Supervising Sound Editor:_ Sam Gemette<br>
_Sound Editors:_ Sam Shaw, John Larsen, Bill Phillips, Michael Ford, Hal Sanders<br>
_Loop Editor:_ Larry Singer<br>
_Sound Effects Consultant:_ Rodney Holland<br>
_Sound Effects Editors:_ Teresa Eckton,  Andy Patterson<br>
_Technical Advisers:_ R.J. Hohman, Steve Foster<br>
_Stunt Co-ordinator:_ Roberto Messina<br>
_Publicist:_ Bridget Terry<br>
_Studio:_ Mediterranean Film Studios<br>
  
**Cast**<br>
Robin Williams _(Popeye)_<br>
Shelley Duvall _(Olive Oyl)_<br>
Ray Walston _(Poopdeck Pappy)_<br>

Paul Dooley _(Wimpy)_<br>

Paul L. Smith _(Bluto)_<br>

Richard Libertini _(Geezil)_<br>

Donald Moffat _(the taxman)_<br>

MacIntyre Dixon _(Cole Oyl)_<br>

Roberta Maxwell _(Nana Oyl)_<br>

Donovan Scott _(Caster Oyl)_<br>

Allan Nicholls _(Roughhouse)_<br>

Wesley Ivan Hurt _(Swee’pea)_<br><br>

_The People of Sweethaven_<br>

Bill Irwin _(Ham Gravy, the old boyfriend)_<br>

Robert Fortier _(Bill Barnacle, the town drunk)_<br>

David McCharen _(Harry Hotcash, the gambler)_<br>

Sharon Kinney _(Cherry, his moll)_<br>

Peter Bray _(Oxblood Oxheart, the fighter)_<br>

Linda Hunt _(Mrs Oxheart, his mom)_<br>

Geoff Hoyle _(Scoop, the reporter)_<br>

Wayne Robson _(Chizzelflint, the pawnbroker)_<br><br>

_The Roughhouse Gang_<br>

Larry Pisoni _(Chico, the dishwasher)_<br>

Carlo Pellegrini _(Swifty, the cook)_<br>

Susan Kingsley _(La Verne, the waitress)_<br>

Michael Christensen _(Splatz, the janitor)_<br><br>

_And_<br>

Ray Cooper _(preacher)_<br>

Noel Parenti _(Slick, the milkman)_<br>

Karen McCormick _(Rosie, the milkmaid)_<br>

John Bristol _(Bear, the hermit)_<br><br>

_The Steinettes_<br>

Julie Janney _(Mena Walfleur)_<br>

Patty Katz _(Mina Walfleur)_<br>

Diane Shaffer _(Mona Walfleur)_<br>

Nathalie Blossom _(Blossom Walfleur)_<br><br>

_The Toughs_<br>

Dennis Franz _(Spike)_<br>

Carlos Brown _(Slug)_<br>

Ned Dowd _(Butch)_<br>

Hovey Burgess _(Mort)_<br>

Roberto Messina _(Gozo)_<br>

Pietro Torrisi _(Bolo)_<br><br>

_The Housewives_<br>

Margery Bond _(Daisy)_<br>

Judy Burgess _(Petunia)_<br>

Sandra MacDonald _(Violet)_<br>

Eve Knoller _(Min)_<br>

Peggy Pisoni _(Pickelina)_<br>

Barbara Zegler _(Daphne)_<br>

Paul Zegler _(Mayor Stonefeller, the official)_<br>

Pamela Burrell _(Mrs Stonefeller)_<br>

David Arkin _(mailman/policeman)_<br><br>

_The Musicians_<br>

Klaus Voormann _(Von Schnitzel, the conductor)_<br>

Doug Dillard _(Clem, the banjo player)_<br>

Van Dyke Parks _(Hoagy, the piano player)_<br>

Stan Wilson _(Oscar, the barber)_<br>

Roberto Dell’Aqua _(the chimneysweep)_<br>

Valerie Velardi _(Cindy, the drudge)_<br>

Jack Mercer  
_(voice of Popeye in the animated prologue)_<br>

USA 1980©<br>
114 mins

35mm print courtesy of the Robert Altman Collection at the UCLA Film & Television Archive.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNTA1NTQ2NzU2LC0xNTI2ODY3ODY0XX0=
-->