
<![endif]-->

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

**A contemporary review**

Perhaps it’s the fact that so few of Oshima’s films have been released here (twelve of the thirteen features made before 1969 have still to be seen in the West) which explains the reluctance of critics from other continents than his own to hazard any attempt at a synthesis of his work. Even though their reaction to his previous individual films has been, for the most part, laudatory, reviewers have maintained a certain respectful distance, as if dealing with a visiting foreign dignitary to whom they had not been properly introduced; and now the sudden onslaught of knowing familiarity with which they are greeting _In the Realm of the Senses_ and his apparent shift from seemingly oblique historical references to seemingly explicit sexual material, while better for the box-office, is equally unhelpful.

For Oshima’s films, despite their deceptive differences of idiom (naturalism in _Boy_, surrealism in _Death by Hanging_, formalism in _The Ceremony_), have a remarkable continuity of theme and tactic. And while his _Empire of the Senses_ can stand unsupported by any feats of scholarship, it is considerably enriched when related to his previous attempts to elucidate the traditionally inscrutable. In a newspaper article in 1971, Oshima declared, ‘I feel that unless we make clear the secret spirit of the Japanese, who hurry to live and hurry to die, Japan will soon be led to war again’; and from first to last, his films function as metaphors for a Japan whose spirit is represented as more at ease with death than with life, which spirit he closely identifies with that of imperialism. (All his films are, on one level, meditations on empire, experienced or remembered.)

Based, for the most part, as in the present case, on a real-life _fait divers_, they all deal with the extinguishing effect of this spirit on youthful (idealist) dreams: their heroes are society’s proscripts, and the films build to a cathartic act of violence as the only possible resolution for irreconcilable tensions. Withdrawing from an intolerable and intolerant society, his leading characters invariably walk an unsteady line between illusion and reality, sincerity and performance, finding in ritual and ceremony a convenient half-way house between them. These rituals, whether domestic or dynastic, provide Oshima’s chamber-piece films with their form as well as their content, enabling him to develop the narrative through a variations-on-a-theme structure, while also developing to breaking point the tension between theme (prescribed behaviour) and variation (the characters’ doomed attempts at self-expression), between forms and feelings. In every case, the distinguishing details of the individual plots, characters and passions are distanced; to quote from a precept of Brecht’s _Short Organum_, ‘portrayed as though they were simply illustrations of general principles valid for the place in question’.

Thus, while _In the Realm of the Senses_ is the first Oshima film to break through the barriers of critical inhibitions, it can also be viewed as a coherent development of Oshima’s recurring themes, strategies and obsessions as outlined in the crude, shorthand model above. The graphic explicitness of its lovers’ couplings, still more the debate over whether their effect is erotic or chastening, is as much a red herring as the tantalisingly coded historical references of _The Ceremony_.

Although the film may be viewed as the choreography of an all-consuming passion (an approach encouraged by the symbiotic performances of its two principals), the dance of death in which the insatiable lovers wrestle their way towards the perfect consummation is not devoid of metaphoric value, and on more than one level. Not just the claustrophobic rooms (emphasised by low camera angles) but the couple’s bodies, too, become prisons in which their quest for freedom is doomed in advance. Sada and Kichi are doubly restricted, first by the society which outlaws their union, and then by their bodies – the limited means through which they endeavour to express their virtually boundless desire. Their constant love-making is less an imperative need (though it’s plainly that as well) than a rite through which they endeavour to express an ineffable emotion and a sense of one-ness which their human condition belies.

And although, in synopsis, the film may not sound much like a political movie, there is no reason, beyond our own inhibitions, why love-making should not provide a potent metaphor for the Japanese spirit. Oshima’s title is not idly chosen: the sensuality he depicts is effectively suppressed (or confined to a professional house) by that other Empire whose troops are seen mobilising in the streets in one of Kichi-zo’s rare moments out of doors. The fusing of roles and identities to which the lovers aspire (at different moments, each by a kind of erotic osmosis, ’becomes’ the other making love to a third party) is a subversive value in a hierarchical society. While the chorus of embarrassed chambermaids and geishas, besides breaking up any audience illusions of sharing in a privileged, private moment, also serve to bring home the fact that such an overriding passion is still, socially, out of place. Almost literally for most of the film, it is balanced on a knife edge. To object to the anatomical region on which the great axe falls is merest hypocrisy. By the final sequence, we are all implicated in the continuing social system which makes such love impossible. It is not Sada, but the censor in all of us who ultimately wields the knife.<br>
**Jan Dawson, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, May 1978**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTE2MTA2MDQ3MV19
-->