Binti, a 12-year-old girl, was born in Congo but has lived with her father Jovial in Belgium since she was a baby. Despite not having any legal documents, Binti wants to live a normal life, and dreams of becoming a famous vlogger like her idol Tatyana. Elias, who is 11, runs his ‘save-the-okapi-club’ without the help of his father, who’s moved to Brazil following his divorce with Elias’  
mother Christine.

When their annoying neighbour invites Christine on a romantic trip to Paris, Elias, upset and angry, runs away to his treehouse. At the same time, police raid Binti and Jovial’s home, sending the two on the run, and Binti into the path of Elias in his treehouse.

When their parents meet shortly after, Binti quickly sees the perfect solution to all her problems. If she can match her dad to Elias’ mom, they can get married and stay in Belgium. Binti joins Elias’ okapi club, and while they organise a big fundraiser together, she secretly starts her plan to make Christine fall in love with Jovial. Until Elias finds out what Binti is really up to…<br>

**Director’s Statement**<br>
I’m fascinated by courageous characters, in this case children who are fighting for what they know they deserve, who have a voice worth listening to, if only someone would pass them the mic.

I was young when I thought I knew what I wanted to do in life, and I lived in an environment that allowed me to do exactly that. Every single day, I’m grateful for this. Because imagine: you are a teenager, dreaming of a future with all your friends. But whilst they have the freedom to develop their talents, you don’t even have the freedom to show your ID, because you don’t have one.

Twelve-year-old Binti dreams of being famous (which 12-year-old doesn’t?  I know I did) but, on paper, she doesn’t exist. Online though, she has more than a thousand followers. Something’s just not right about that. Binti meets Elias, a lonely Belgian animal lover who wants to save the okapi and is still dealing with his parents’ divorce. She wants to match her dad to Elias’ mom because she believes that in doing so, she will be able to stay in Belgium. Elias dreams of organising a benefit to save the okapis, but he can’t do so on his own. Although at first, they have separate agendas, both children will eventually understand that together they stand stronger, that they need each other, and that together is better than alone.

_Binti_ is a film in which two children learn that they need each other to accomplish their dreams. Despite the seriousness of the subject, _Binti_ is an entertaining and approachable film, full of colour, humour, friendship and love. It believes in a successful multi-cultural society and in following your dreams. The social drama gets a positive twist in combining it with the energy and humour of a romantic comedy.<br>
**Production notes**<br>

**Yasmina**
Heading home from football, Yasmina sees her father being arrested.<br>
<br>

**YASMINA**<br>
_Directors:_ Ali Esmili, Claire Cahen

France 2018<br>
22 mins<br>

**BINTI**<br>
_Writer and Director:_ Frederike Migom<br>
_Producer:_ Katleen Goossens<br>
_Co-Producers:_ Annabella Nezri, Floor Onrust<br>
_Line Producer:_ Wim Ah Goossens<br>
_Production Manager:_ Dorien Onsea<br>
_1st Assistant Director:_ Johan Ivens<br>
_Location_ _Manager:_ Jana Mannaerts<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Joachim Philippe<br>
_Gaffer:_ Mattijs Nackaerts<br>
Editor: Clemence Samson<br>
_Production_ _Designer:_ Talina Casier<br>
_Costume Designer:_ Sofie Callaerts<br>
_Hair & Make-Up Designer:_ Ingeborg Van Eetvelde _Composer:_ Le Motel<br>
_Sound_ _Engineer:_ Coen Gravendaal<br>
_Supervising Sound Editor:_ Jan Schermer<br>

**Cast**<br>
Bebel Tshiani Baloji _(Binti)_<br>
Mo Bakker _(Elias)_<br>
Joke Devynck _(Christine)_<br>
Baloji _(Jovial)_<br>
Frank Dierens _(Floris)_<br>
Alix Konadu _(Maaika)_<br>
Veronica Van Belle _(Zoë)_<br>
Aboubakr Bensaihi _(Farid)_<br>
Kuno Bakker _(Elias’ father)_<br>
Tatyana Beloy _(Tatyana)_<br>

Belgium 2019<br>
90 mins<br>

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTU1ODI4OTc4MF19
-->