
Following on from the success of _The Umbrellas of Cherbourg_ comes  _Les Demoiselles de Rochefort_ – Jacques Demy’s large-scale tribute to the Hollywood musical featuring screen legend Gene Kelly. The story centres on twin sisters Delphine and Solange (played by real-life sisters Catherine Deneuve and Francoise Dorléac) who, tired of their humdrum existence, dream of finding success and romance in Paris. The superb ensemble, also featuring Danielle Darrieux, Michel Piccoli, Jacques Perrin, George Chakiris and Grover Dale, weave and wander around the town, looking for and just missing the love of their lives.<br>
**bfi.org.uk**

With a plot of pure Shakespearean farce, witty dialogue and lyrics by Demy, and a magnificent jazz score by the late, great Michel Legrand,  
_Les Demoiselles de Rochefort_ is an effervescent celebration of life that is sure to captivate and uplift.

As the follow-up to his all-sung musical drama _The Umbrellas of Cherbourg_ (1964), Jacques Demy created something even bigger and brasher –  
_Les Demoiselles de Rochefort_, a slightly tongue-in-cheek tribute to the classic Hollywood musicals of Vincente Minnelli, Stanley Donen and Jerome Robbins. Shot entirely in the Atlantic port-city of the title – repainted for the occasion in DayGlo colours, and with Rochefort’s expansive Place Colbert co-opted as a giant sound-stage – _Demoiselles_ bounces with irrepressible vitality from the get-go. The presence in the cast of Gene Kelly and George Chakiris (_West Side Story_) underlines the Hollywood link.

The plot is minimal – twin sisters dream of escaping to Paris, a carnival breezes into town, three sets of lovers are kept apart by contrivances until the final reel – but Demy misses no opportunity for explosions of song and dance on every corner. Unlike its predecessor, the film does include spoken dialogue, although one dinner-party scene plays out in rhymed couplets. Both song and dance are seamlessly integrated into the action; a character will walk along the street and be whirled by successive anonymous passers-by into brief dance routines.

It’s a lesser achievement than _Umbrellas_ – it often feels self-conscious, Demy’s lyrics tend towards the cheesy, and a minor plot-strand about an axe murderer is jarringly out of place. With the exception of Danielle Darrieux as the twin girls’ mother, singing voices are dubbed. But the all-pervasive charm, seasoned with a touch of Demy’s characteristic melancholy, wins through. Michel Legrand’s jazz-tinged score seduces the ear, and the performances – especially Michel Piccoli as a lovelorn music-shop owner – are appealing. It’s also the only film to team real-life sisters Catherine Deneuve and Françoise Dorléac: the latter met a tragically early death in a motor accident only a few months after _Demoiselles_ was released. They’re delightful together.<br>
**Philip Kemp, _Sight & Sound_, February 2020**

**A contemporary review for the dubbed version of  ‘Les Demoiselles de Rochefort’**

The dubbed version of _Les Demoiselles de Rochefort_ is a very coy film; an anthology of sentimental cliché, in which the inventive details of narrative and imagery only pour ironic fuel on the chocolate-box extravagance. A film I admire, on the other hand, is the original, which has been showing in Paris for several months. The problems of translating Jacques Demy’s gentle _marivaudage_ into an English idiom, of reproducing a particular Gallic tightrope walk between tenderness and whimsy, plus a catastrophic decision to show the film on the Cinerama screen: these, more than the familiar vicissitudes of dubbing, have sunk the English version.

It must be allowed that Demy is an habitual offender on the count of sentimentality, and there are embarrassing lapses in this musical, as there have been in his previous films; yet he is capable of a tender, unsentimental euphoria more intoxicating than any other film work in the field of sentimental farce.  And there is one strain of this delicate rapture that belongs to French art alone, ethereal, all too fragile, declining to coyness much as Ustinov’s charm dissipates into eastern European whimsy: suddenly the miracle of the farce rose becomes the contrivance of outworn convention, the merriment becomes forced gaiety and weary schmaltz, vulgar and insensitive. And Demy, never far from cliché, is precipitated into these lapses by translation: the economical dialogue, the enchanting lyrics turn banal; and Cinerama distorts the exquisitely balanced frames in a particularly unfortunate manner – Demy’s candy-floss carnival is mocked by the big curving screen as crooked mirrors mock a fairground crowd.

Just as the dialogue is converted into all the simple-minded corn which Demy had modified into an entrancing simplicity, the theatrical fantasia of Rochefort, painted a musical-comedy dreamscape, is distorted from a subtle delirium into the grotesque self-parody Ghislain Cloquet had painstakingly avoided. What Coutard did for _Lola_, Cloquet had done for _Demoiselles_, a magical spell of light and shade which offset the fairytale narrative to perfection. As the visual poise is disturbed, the density of the narrative is dissipated in the English version: all Demy’s films are highly concentrated, full of minute correspondences and parallels, most of which have disappeared in the banal exchanges that now drag the narrative to its familiar conclusion (little encouragement to pursue the added intricacy of Demy’s plots, intensified by serialisation – characters overlapping from film to film, so that each story unfolds more than one multiple farce, with subtle anticipations and echoes only more enjoyable on repeated viewing). Even the actors’ air of enjoyment seems strained, the narrative complexities seem artifice, the pictorial inventiveness a luscious joke... like  
_Les Parapluies de Cherbourg_, the film comes across as garish, synthetic, and coy. But in fact the colour is less hysterical, the Legrand score less schmaltzy, the plot less sentimental: the original _Demoiselles de Rochefort_ marks a return to the imaginative poise of _Lola_.

Whatever this dubbed version may indicate, Demy is still capable of prodigious achievements; he can be trite and affected, but he can create miracles of un-self-pitying poignancy in the highly stylised world of the operetta, where few artists tread with such Mozartian felicity – not merely charming or amusing, but profoundly moving.

Carey Harrison, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, August 1967

(NOTE: This review was written before the distributors decided to let London see the French version as well as the dubbed one.)
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTI3ODI4ODU1OV19
-->