<![endif]-->

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

After a journey into the 18th-century wilderness for _The Last of the Mohicans_, Michael Mann returns to the urban terrain of his television series _Miami Vice_ and _Crime Story_ and his features _Manhunter_ and _Thief_ with a film which can be read as a compendium of his work to date. Like James Caan’s safe-cracker, Frank, in 1981’s _Thief_, Neil McCauley is single-mindedly devoted to his profession (‘What are you?’ Hanna asks him, ‘A monk?’), and only loses control of his own destiny when he tries to buy himself what Hanna, when he confronts him in the coffee shop, dismisses as ‘a regular-type life’. Vincent Hanna, meanwhile, is a variation on William Petersen’s Will Graham from _Manhunter_ in his talent for putting himself in the shoes of his prey and seeing what they see, and in the way this leaves him closer to those he is pursuing than those he is protecting.

In one breathtaking sequence in _Heat_ which evokes the voyeuristic, hall-of-mirrors feel of _Manhunter_, Hanna and his men watch McCauley’s crew scouting out a refinery. When they have gone, Hanna stands exactly where they stood, trying to guess what they were looking at – before realising that they were looking at him, and that McCauley has now lured him into the open. The camera then pulls back to show McCauley taking his picture. Hanna can ultimately catch McCauley because they are just alike (Mann suggests this early on with near identical shots of Hanna picking up his gun from the table before he goes to work, and McCauley putting his down when he gets home). Both have their matching crews, and the presence of Wes Studi, the formidable Magua from _The Last of the Mohicans_, as Hanna’s right-hand man Casals, alerts us to _Heat_’s echo of that film, as the bands of modern-day Mohicans and Hurons track each other across the jungle that is Los Angeles.

Mann reinvents LA here with the same visionary gaze he turned on Miami in _Miami Vice_, Las Vegas in _Crime Story_ and Atlanta in _Manhunter_. From the ‘dead-tech, post-modernist’ home where Hanna’s marriage falls apart, to McCauley’s beach-side glass box, bathed in blue light (just like Graham’s home in _Manhunter_), to the red-and-white-checked concrete cubes by the runway where McCauley dies, there’s not a boring building in the film: Mann is the best director of architecture since Antonioni. In fact, few filmmakers at work today can rival Mann’s control of every detail of the filmmaking process – perhaps this is why his films are so infrequent – from the fluent but unostentatious camera movements (worthy, as David Thomson has pointed out, of Max Ophuls), to the precise, almost David Mamet-like dialogue, to the expertly chosen soundtrack, which manages to make artists as diverse as Moby and György Ligeti sound like they belong on the same record.

David Thomson has singled out another Mann trademark, his peerless use of vivid supporting players, and _Heat_ certainly doesn’t disappoint in this respect. Mann discovers compelling new sides of Jon Voight (Nate, who could be Jack Palance’s younger brother), Val Kilmer (blond, ponytailed, puffy-faced and petulant as the safe-cracker Shiherlis) and Tom Sizemore, typecast as a cartoon psychopath in the likes of _Natural Born Killers_ and _Devil in a Blue Dress_, but here reinvented as the solid, grey-haired foot soldier, Cheritto. Tom Noonan, the serial killer from _Manhunter_, has a great cameo, bearded like an orthodox priest, as the source who tips McCauley off about the bank job, while Ted Levine – the killer in _Manhunter_’s de facto sequel, _The Silence of the Lambs_, and a veteran of _Crime Story_ – turns up balding and moustachioed as one of Hanna’s men. Mann also takes the trouble to populate his man’s world with interesting women: Diane Venora, barely glimpsed since _Bird_, as Justine Hanna; Natalie Portman of _Léon_ as her suicidal daughter; Ashley Judd, finally fulfilling the promise of _Ruby in Paradise_, as Charlene Shiherlis. Only _NYPD Blue_’s Amy Brenneman, in the pivotal role of Eady, fails to make much of an impression.

The real casting coup, of course, lies in the first pairing of De Niro and Pacino (they were father and son in _The Godfather Part II_, but never shared a scene). The first half of _Heat_ plays absorbingly off the mounting tension about when the two will meet. Hanna first sees McCauley’s Satanic image through a heat-vision viewfinder while staking out the metal depository; McCauley gets his look at Hanna through a telephoto lens. When it finally arrives, two hours in, their single scene together (bar the final shootout) is all the more highly charged for the banality of the setting, in a coffee shop. Rewardingly, the confrontation seems to have the same significance for the actors as it does for the characters: two driven professionals, frequently compared to each other and both at the peak of their powers, finally get the chance to size each other up at close range. In the same way that McCauley and Hanna’s duel inspires each to greater feats of ingenuity, so the actors bring out the best in each other. Pacino is on edge here, with an alarming habit of suddenly shouting his words, but such is his authority that he makes it seem like the character’s mannerism rather than the actor’s; Hanna is not the loose cannon of cop-movie cliché, but a man who _pretends_ to be when he needs to intimidate people, whether an informer or his wife’s lover. De Niro, meanwhile, rises to the challenge with his most compelling work since _The King of Comedy_. Thankfully free of tics, his McCauley is so ruthlessly controlled that he barely moves his head; his eyes do all the work. If _Heat_ were a play, you could imagine De Niro and Pacino swopping the roles every night, like Olivier and Richardson in _Othello_.

‘All I am is what I’m going after,’ says Hanna near the end of his quest, a motto that could serve as well for McCauley, or for any of Mann’s protagonists. In Mann’s universe, as in that of Howard Hawks, professionalism is all that counts; but, unlike Hawks, Mann shows the cost of such a code in widows and wrecked marriages. In fact, for a cop movie, Heat seems unusually suffused with an awareness of death. Hanna’s wife Justine, who, like her husband, always wears black, keeps telling him that he is walking dead through life. When McCauley and Hanna meet, they compare their dreams – and both have been dreaming of death, of time running out. (For Mann and his leads, all into their 50s, this seems to carry a real weight.) And, in the film’s only superfluous scene, Waingro announces himself as the Grim Reaper before murdering a prostitute – leaving Hanna, who, in his wife’s haunting words ‘lives among the remains of dead people’, to pick up the pieces.

Of all the directors in America today who are set on keeping _film noir_ alive, Mann seems the most willing to invest the genre with real characters and morality, and the most reluctant to fall back on cliché. (Which doesn’t mean he fails to deliver on the set pieces: the bank robbery here, which spirals into a pitched battle on the streets of downtown LA that’s as ferocious as anything in _The Last of the Mohicans_, will surely stand as one of the great failed-heist sequences.) For those who cherish _Thief_, _Manhunter_ and _Mohicans_, and for those who believe that Martin Scorsese’s post _King of Comedy_ output has slipped into a sort of flashy self-parody identified by Gilbert Adair as ‘Scors_ese_’, as in journalese or legalese, _Heat_, placed by the accident of its British release schedule within a month of _Casino_, another, more vigorously hyped three-hour De Niro crime story, only serves to bolster the case for Michael Mann as the key American auteur of the last ten years.<br>
**John Wrathall, _Sight and Sound_, February 1996**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEwODExNTc5MV19
-->