

**Morricone and Pasolini**

One of the first CDs I ever bought was a 1993 compilation of film themes by Ennio Morricone. I remember the cover being pretty uninspiring – five film reels seen through a purple and pink filter – plus there was no picture of the man himself, not even a still from one of the films. The album included memorable themes from lesser-known pictures such as _La califfa_ (Alberto Bevilacqua, 1970) and _Maddalena_ (Jerzy Kawalerowicz, 1971) but most came from Sergio Leone: _The Good, the Bad and the Ugly_ (1966), _Once upon a Time in the West_ (1968), _A Fistful of Dynamite_ (1971) and _Once Upon a Time in America_ (1984). Thirty years after their final work together, the Leone-Morricone collaboration is rightly seen as one of the most symbiotic of all director-composer partnerships. However, since his very first forays into film, Morricone has enjoyed long-term collaborations with a variety of filmmakers: Mauro Bolognini, Luciano Salce, Giuliano Montaldo, Aldo Lado, Roberto Faenza and Giuseppe Tornatore to name only a few. Apart from Tornatore, whose _Cinema Paradiso_ (1988) features one of the composer’s most popular scores, you rarely see any of the above names on a Morricone greatest-hits compilation. The same is true of another important collaborator of Morricone’s, the great Italian poet and filmmaker Pier Paolo Pasolini.

Morricone and Pasolini first worked together in 1966 when both were at important junctures in their respective careers. The composer was fresh from injecting new life into the western score with his themes for Leone’s _Dollars_ trilogy: out had gone lush, syrupy strings, in had come Duane Eddy-style electric guitar, the whistles of Alessandro Alessandroni and the ethereal wordless vocals of Edda Dell’Orso together with bells, whipcracks, Jew’s harp and harmonica. 1966 was the year of the final and most ambitious instalment of Leone’s trilogy, _The Good, the Bad and the Ugly_, but Morricone – already conspicuously prolific – also squeezed in several other scores, including westerns such as Carlo Lizzani’s _The Hills Run Red_ and Sergio Sollima’s  
_The Big Gundown_ as well as comedies, political thrillers and historical dramas.

By 1966, Pasolini had three features under his belt – _Accattone_ (1961), _Mamma_ _Roma_ (1962) and _The Gospel According to Matthew_ (1964) – in addition to various short films including _La ricotta_, his contribution to anthology film _RoGoPaG_ (1963). With each successive project, he was becoming more and more interested in formal experimentation, in irony and allegory. In terms of music for his films, he had worked with composers Carlo Rustichelli and Luis Bacalov, although neither had been called upon to provide a full score in the traditional sense. Any original themes ended up being just one element of the films’ soundscapes, with Pasolini relying on an eclectic range of pre-existing music, from classical to folk, jazz to blues. While his approach didn’t radically change upon meeting Morricone, he certainly gave his new composer more leeway. When they met to discuss _Hawks and Sparrows_ (1966), their first film together, Pasolini presented Morricone with a list of pieces he wanted to use. Morricone insisted that he preferred writing his own music and to his surprise, Pasolini gave him the green light.

Pasolini described _Hawks and Sparrows_ as an ‘ideo-comic fable’; it follows father and son Totò and Ninetto (Totò and Ninetto Davoli) as they make their way through the outskirts of Rome. They encounter a talking crow (voiced by poet Francesco Leonetti) whose pronouncements reflect some of Pasolini’s own political views in the post-war period. The director’s previous three features had opened with credits in black text on an off-white background; the credits for _Hawks and Sparrows_ take a different shape. They appear in white against a shot of the night sky… and are sung at the same time. A jaunty violin melody builds into a full-bodied, unmistakeably Morriconian sound accompanying singer Domenico Modugno (of ‘Volare’ fame) as he makes his way through cast and crew. ‘Sergio Citti helped out as a philosopher’ he sings, producer Alfredo Bini ‘risked his position’ while Pasolini ‘risked his reputation’. Many films had featured spoken titles before – Orson Welles’s _The Magnificent Ambersons_ (1942), Jean-Luc Godard’s _Le Mépris_ (1963) – but very few had actually been sung (two years after _Hawks and Sparrows_, Otto Preminger would have Harry Nilsson sing the end credits to his 1968 counter-culture satire _Skidoo_). Another of Morricone’s stand-out pieces for _Hawks and Sparrows_ is ‘Dance School in the Sun’, a joyous theme whose shuffling drums, bells and twangy electric guitar wouldn’t seem out of place on one of his spaghetti western scores.

The Pasolini-Morricone collaboration continued into _The Earth Seen from the Moon_, an episode for the 1967 anthology film _The Witches_. Totò and Ninetto are reunited and this time play ginger-haired father and son Ciancicato and Baciù Miao, who, after mourning the death of wife and mother Crisantema, decide to set off in search of a new family matriarch. Morricone’s themes in  this film – whether wistful or comic – are built around beautiful melodies on  the mandolin.

Pasolini took his composer into different territory again with _Theorem_ (1968), the tale of a mysterious young man (Terence Stamp) who seduces all the members of a bourgeois family. There’s very little of the lightness of _Hawks and Sparrows_ and _The Earth Seen from the Moon_ here. On the whole, Morricone’s themes for _Theorem_ are coolly enigmatic, more dissonant, mixed in with existing pieces such as the mournful jazz trumpet of Ted Curson’s ‘Tears for Dolphy’. In a 2013 entry for his blog _The Blue Moment_, Richard Williams describes Morricone’s work on Theorem as ‘jagged [and] post-serialist’ but suggests it’s ‘Curson’s piece that carries the greatest emotional weight, its spare contours providing the perfect evocation of the discontents that accompanied Italy’s post-war reconstruction.’

Morricone had not been called upon for 1967’s _Oedipus Rex_ and his music was also absent from _Pigsty_ (1969) and _Medea_ (1970). He returned, albeit in a largely consultative role, for Pasolini’s final four films: _The Decameron_ (1971), _The Canterbury Tales_ (1972), _Arabian_ _Nights_ (1974) and _Salò or the 120 Days of Sodom_ (1975). For all four, Pasolini took a similar approach to his early work with Rustichelli and Bacalov and constructed a soundscape of mostly pre-existing music; only with _Arabian_ _Nights_ did he give Morricone a freer hand to compose new pieces (including the gorgeous ‘Dunja’s Theme’). Having insisted on composing original material since the beginning of his working relationship with Pasolini, Morricone accepted the director’s wishes this  time around.

Looking over the pair’s near decade-long working relationship, it’s clear – as Antonella Sisto points out in _Film Sound in Italy_ (2014) – that ‘Pasolini’s ideological consciousness… finds play in the stylistic dissonant experimentation of bringing together radically different musical and linguistic texts in the soundtrack… He experiments with dissonance as dissent, to voice difference against homologation and sameness.’  
**Pasquale Iannone, _Sight & Sound_, January 2015**
<br><br>


**Salò or The 120 Days of Sodom**<br>
**(Salò o Le 120 giornate di Sodoma)**

_Director_: Pier Paolo Pasolini

_Production Company_:  
P.E.A. – Produzioni Europee Associate,

Les Productions Artistes Associés

_Producer_: Alberto Grimaldi

_Unit Managers:_ Alessandro Mattei, Renzo David, Angelo Zemella

_Production Manager_: Antonio Girasante

_Production Supervisor_: Alberto De Stefanis

_Post-production Supervisor_: Enzo Ocone

_1st Assistant Director_: Umberto Angelucci

_2nd Assistant Director_: Fiorella Infascelli

_Continuity_: Beatrice Banfi

_Screenplay_: Pier Paolo Pasolini

_Script Collaborator_: Sergio Citti

_Based on the novel by_:

Donatien Alphonse François de Sade

_Director of Photography_: Tonino Delli Colli

_Camera Operators_: Carlo Tafani, Emilio Bestetti

_1st Assistant Cameraman_: Sandro Battaglia

_2nd Assistant Cameraman_: Giancarlo Granatelli

_Editor_: Nino Baragli

_1st Assistant Editor_: Ugo De Rossi

_2nd Assistant Editor_: Alfredo Menchini

_Art Director_: Dante Ferretti

_Set Dresser_: Osvaldo Desideri

_Costumes_: Danilo Donati

_Assistant Costumes_: Vanni Castellani

_Costumes Created by_: Farani

_Make-up_: Alfredo Tiberi

_Special Make-up Effects_: Rocchetti-Carboni

_Hair_: Giuseppina Bovino

_Wigs_: Rocchetti-Carboni

_Music played on the pianoforte by_:

Arnaldo Graziosi

_Music Publisher_: Eureka

_Music Consultant_: Ennio Morricone

_Sound_: Domenico Pasquadisceglie,

Giorgio Loviscek

_Boom Operator_: Giuseppina Sagliano

_Mixer_: Fausto Ancillai

_Sound Effects_: Luciano Anzellotti

_Post-synchronisation_:

International Recording Studios (Rome)

_Set Furnishings/Drapes_: D’Angelo

_Crystal_: D.O.M.

_Porcelain_: Richard – Ginori

_Unit Publicity_: Nico Naldini

_Cast:_

Paolo Bonacelli _(the duke)_

Giorgio Cataldi _(the bishop)_

Uberto P. Quintavalle _(chief magistrate)_

Aldo Valletti _(the president)_

Caterina Boratto _(Signora Castelli)_

Elsa De Giorgi _(Signora Maggi)_

Hélène Surgère _(Signora Vaccari)_

Sonia Saviange _(the piano virtuoso)_

Sergio Fascetti_,_ Bruno Musso, Antonio Orlando_,_ Claudio Cicchetti, Franco Merli,

Umberto Chessari, Lamberto Book,

Gaspare Di Jenno _(masked victims)_

Giuliana Melis, Faridah Malik,

Graziella Aniceto, Renata Moar_,_ Dorit Henke_,_ Antinisca Nemour, Benedetta Gaetani,

Olga Andreis _(female victims)_

Tatiana Mogilansky, Susanna Radaelli_,_  
Giuliana Orlandi, Liana Acquaviva

_(young women)_

Rinaldo Missaglia, Giuseppe Patruno_,_

Guido Galletti, Efisio Etzi _(young soldiers)_

Claudio Troccoli, Fabrizio Menichini,

Maurizio Valaguzza, Ezio Manni _(collaborators)_

Paola Pieracci, Carla Terlizzi,

Anna Maria Dossena, Anna Recchimuzzi,

Ines Pellegrini _(procuresses/servants)_

Marco Bellocchio _(dubbed voice of the president) *_

Laura Betti _(dubbed voice of Signora Vaccari) *_

Michel Piccoli _(voice of the duke, French version) *_

Italy/France 1975

117 mins

* Uncredited
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE4MDg1MjA5NDBdfQ==
-->