

The word ‘Tlamess’ means an enchantress’ spell, as well as something inexplicable, and Tunisian filmmaker Ala Eddine Slim’s beautifully shot second feature is as enchanting and intriguing as the name suggests.  
**bfi.org.uk**

S is a young soldier in the Tunisian desert. When his mother dies, he gets a week’s leave and goes back home. But he never returns to the barracks and becomes the target of a manhunt through the backstreets of his working-class neighbourhood, before vanishing into the mountains. Several years later, F, a young woman married to a rich businessman finds out that she’s pregnant. One morning, she leaves her luxurious villa and disappears into the forest.

**Director’s Biography**  
Ala Eddine Slim is a Tunisian filmmaker. He has directed several short films, art videos and feature films, selected and multi-awarded in many international film festivals (Clermont-Ferrand, Grand Prix FID Marseille 2012 for _Babylon_, Lion of the Future, Best Technical Contribution at the Venice Film Festival 2016, and Tanit d’Or at JCC 2016 for _The Last of Us_).

_Tlamess_ is his second fiction film, a Franco-Tunisian co-production supported by the Franco-Tunisian fund, the Tunisian Ministry of Culture Fund, the Aide aux Cinemas du Monde of the CNC and the World Cinema Fund Europe.
<br><br>

**TLAMESS**<br>
_Director:_ Ala Eddine Slim<br>

_Production Companies:_ Exit Productions,

Still Moving, Inside Productions, Madbox Studios<br>

_With the support of:_ Franco-Tunisian fund from CNC & CNCI, Tunisian Ministry of Culture Fund, Aide aux Cinemas du Monde of the CNC

World Cinema Fund Europe,

The Kamel Lazaar Foundation, SACEM<br>

_Producers:_ Ala Eddine Slim, Juliette Lepoutre,

Ali Hassouna, Chawki Knis, Pierre Menahem _<br>
Screenplay:_ Ala Eddine Slim

_Director of Photography:_ Amine Messadi

_Editor:_ Ala Eddine Slim

_Set Design:_ Malek Gnaoui

_Music:_ Oiseaux-Tempête

_Sound:_ Moncef Taleb

_With:_

Abdullah Miniawy

Souhir Ben Amara

Khaled Ben Aissa

Tunisia-France 2019

120 mins
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE3MjE0MDQyODFdfQ==
-->