<![endif]-->

Adapted – somewhat loosely – by Dudley Nichols from Geoffrey Household’s _Rogue Mail_, Fritz Lang’s thriller, set on the eve of WWII, centres on a big-game hunter (Pidgeon) arrested by the Gestapo after he takes a ‘practice shot’ at Hitler. Escaping to England, he himself is hunted by various sinister agents. Arthur Miller provides the crisp expressionist camerawork; one scene in the Underground is a tour de force.

bfi.org.uk

‘Somewhere in Germany, shortly before the war’, British big-game hunter  
Alan Thorndike (Walter Pidgeon) locates a scenic ridge in the mountains that allows him to frame Adolf Hitler, brooding on an adjacent balcony, in the crosshairs of his unloaded rifle. He squeezes off an imaginary shot, just for the thrill of it… then decides, on the spur of the moment, to load his weapon and really do the deed.

It isn’t until we reach the other end of Fritz Lang’s _Man Hunt_ that Thorndike, an avowed pacifist who no longer kills the animals he hunts, finally understands what motivated this fateful change of heart – but in the meantime he is caught, arrested and interrogated by monocled Gestapo man Quive-Smith (George Sanders), himself a strutting gamesman who recognises his illustrious prisoner by sight. He offers to set Thorndike free if he’ll sign a document stating that he was sent to Germany as an assassin by the British government – which is untrue, and which he refuses to do. Subsequently beaten and pushed off the same ridge to his presumed death, Thorndike survives and stows aboard a Danish freighter also carrying a sinister passage-paying Nazi (John Carradine, even more menacing than he was as ‘Baron Latos’ in _House of Dracula_) who has claimed Thorndike’s identity and passport. Back in a London generously peppered with bit players from Universal’s _Sherlock Holmes_ series, Thorndike finds his homeland equally lousy with Nazis and spies, marauding as everything from taxi drivers to little old ladies, as Quive-Smith taunts his every fugitive step by telephone. Thorndike is saved from near-capture when he fortuitously bumps into Cockney seamstress Jerry Stokes (Joan Bennett, in the first of four films as Lang’s star and muse), a rewritten prostitute whose arrival heralds comedic contrast with Thorndike’s staid upper-crust acquaintances, a whiff of sentimental romance and the opportunity for patriotic tragedy.

Based on the popular 1939 novel _Rogue Male_ by Geoffrey Household (which sprang from a story published in the _Atlantic Monthly_) and inherited from John Ford as he busied himself with _The Grapes of Wrath_, _Man Hunt_ was Fritz Lang’s sixth American film and the picture that reconsecrated a devotion to paranoid thrillers which would carry him through his next eight pictures and beyond. Set before Britain declared war on Hitler’s Germany in September 1939 and released six months before the US entered the fray after the attack on Pearl Harbor, _Man Hunt_ not only despises the Third Reich but also takes a quietly contemptuous stance towards America’s own reluctance to declare itself Hitler’s enemy, mirrored back at the American moviegoer by the narrative’s depiction of Britain’s reticence (permissible criticism in light of a Neutrality Act forbidding US films of the time to endorse Britain’s war involvement). The closing shot, which depicts a British airdrop of armed soldiers over Germany, is brazenly scored with ‘America the Beautiful’, an ingenious circumvention of such ‘endorsement’.

Though not one of Lang’s best films, _Man Hunt_ is worth seeing as a catalogue of cinematic invention, as well as a keen-eyed political statement. The first  
17 minutes alone are a remarkable demonstration of how to sustain interest against the grain. We open with a long, disembodied tracking shot through a studio wood, incorporating two easily overlooked dissolves that may well condense what was once a still more extended shot, taking its sweet time to introduce the human element; after Thorndike’s capture, the film continues on for a full eight minutes before the first word of English is spoken; and following Thorndike’s beating, he is dragged into Quive-Smith’s presence for a scene in which George Sanders is the only actor shown in a room full of other men’s silhouettes. The film’s highlight, aside from the sweet business between Bennett and Pidgeon, is a suspenseful sequence of Thorndike being stalked by the cane-dagger-wielding Carradine through the tunnel of a magnificent London Underground station set.

There are some important grace notes, such as the farewell kiss that Thorndike subtly blows to Jerry on the bridge where they last meet, or the fact that Lang frames it with the hero’s back turned to camera, thus giving the moment tender sentimentality without making Hollywood’s usual vulgar meal of it.  
Lang pulls this punch more than once in the scenes involving these two characters, and his refusal to parade or burlesque what is sacred between them is key to this uneven film’s nagging, undismissable quality.<br>
**Tim Lucas, _Sight & Sound_, March 2010**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTY5MDMxNDk1Nl19
-->