

_Jezebel_, that’s where the career really began to take shape. Hal [Wallis] found _Jezebel_ for me. I remember David Selznick wanted to sue us because we came out with it just before _Gone with the Wind_. But in a way I think it was truer to the feeling of the South at that time than his film. I’ve always felt _Gone with the Wind_ would have been twice as good if it had been in black and white, more intimate, smaller. It’s a pity these days that you have to film in colour, you can’t make what is essentially a black and white subject in black and white. _Baby Jane_ would have been much too pretty in colour. On the other hand, _Elizabeth and Essex_ and _Mr. Skeffington_ would have been marvellous in colour. But in the Thirties, the studio was only allocated two colour films a year, because it was so expensive and there was only one process, Technicolor. Those of us who made money at the box office never got colour films because we didn’t need that extra attraction. They gave the colour to the terrible scripts, as an added inducement to get the public in.  
**Bette Davis interviewed by Margaret Hinxman, _Sight and Sound_, Winter 1971-72**

_Jezebel_ is not entirely typical of the thirties cycle of Romantic Old South films, and contains a number of variations on the plantocracy theme which suggest a slightly less idealised image of the antebellum milieu. The iconography of the Old South is clearly present, of course, complete with magnificent estates, gentlemen planters and chivalrous officers, well-mannered belles, devoted family retainers, and so on. Typically, the focus is on the planter aristocracy, and we get hardly any sense of the wider social context, such as the crucial factor of slavery (which supported the plantocracy) or the presence of other classes of white Southerners.

But where the film excels is in its characterisation of antebellum social norms and mores. Much of this impulse is centred on the Bette Davis character, a Southern vixen whose curt manners disrupt the (usually unquestioned) social rules of Southern womanhood. This apparently subversive figure is nevertheless deeply rooted in Old South ideology – it is not aimed at challenging the plantocracy as such (Julie’s identification with the traditional Southern way of life is unambiguous), nor does it upset the genre’s otherwise comfortable image of the antebellum milieu.

But [William] Wyler introduces an element of humanism (and irony) into the representation, which previous Romantic Old South films either completely ignored, or simply subsumed under explicitly pro-South propaganda. This is particularly evident in the Henry Fonda character, Preston Dillard, whose relatively liberal polemic on the fundamental weakness of an economy based on slavery, for example, signals at least a partial rejection of nostalgia as the principle driving force behind antebellum dramas (cf. _Gone with the Wind_). _Jezebel_ can therefore be seen in terms of a development of certain generic conventions, not completely challenging the ideological constraints, but not completely identifying with them either.  
**Jim Pines, National Film Theatre programme notes**

**A contemporary review**  
Really brilliant acting gives a quite ordinary story vivid life and complete reality. Bette Davis has the courage to portray a detestable character. Julie is mean, cruel, selfish, and tyrannical. Her personality dominates the entire film, and her almost savage intensity has a quality which it is difficult to forget. The supporting players are competent, but have comparatively few opportunities of distinguishing themselves. William Wyler’s direction is imaginative and forceful. The old customs of the Southern States are quaint and interestingly shown. There are some terrible pictures of the funeral processions through the streets of the fever victims. Altogether this is a thought-provoking and stimulating picture, but some film-goers may find the Southern dialect difficult to follow.  
**_Monthly Film Bulletin,_ April 1938**
<br><br>


**JEZEBEL**  
_Directed by:_ William Wyler  
©/_Production Company:_ Warner Bros.  
_Executive Producer:_ Hal B. Wallis  
_Associate Producer:_ Henry Blanke  
_Screen Play by:_ Clements Ripley, Abem Finkel, John Huston  
_From the play by:_ Owen Davis Sr  
_Photography by:_ Ernest Haller  
_Editor:_ Warren Low  
_Art Director:_ Robert Haas  
_Costumes by:_ Orry-Kelly  
_Music by:_ Max Steiner  
_Musical Director:_ Leo F. Forbstein  
_Sound by:_ Robert B. Lee  
_Technical Adviser:_ Dalton S. Reymond

_uncredited_  
_Unit Manager:_ Robert Fellows  
_Assistant Director:_ Robert Ross  
_2nd Assistant Director:_ Arthur Lueker  
_Script Clerk:_ Freda Rosenblatt  
_Contributor to Treatment:_ Louis Edelman  
_Contributor to Script Construction:_ Robert Buckner  
_2nd Camera:_ Al Roberts  
_Assistant Camera:_ Buddy Weiler  
_Grip:_ Stanley Young  
_Gaffer:_ Cecil Craig  
_Best Boy:_ Bob Galbraith  
_Stills:_ Mack Elliott  
_Assistant Editor:_ Rudi Fehr  
_Set Dresser:_ Fred M. MacLean  
_Assistant Props:_ George Sweeney  
_Props:_ Pat Patterson  
_Men’s Wardrobe:_ Bert Soter  
_Wardrobe:_ Ida Greenfield  
_Make-up:_ Herbert Sutch, Karl Herlinger, Carl Axzelle  
_Hairstylists:_ Margaret Donovan, Helen Lierley  
_Orchestration:_ Hugo Friedhofer  
_Recordists:_ B. Berry, Frank Weixel  
_Boom Operator:_ J. Jensen  
_Publicity Director:_ Robert S. Taplinger

**Cast**  
Bette Davis _(Julie Marsden)_  
Henry Fonda _(Preston Dillard)_  
George Brent _(Buck Cantrell)_  
Margaret Lindsay _(Amy Bradford Dillard)_  
Donald Crisp _(Dr Livingstone)_  
Fay Bainter _(Aunt Belle Massey)_  
Richard Cromwell _(Ted Dillard)_  
Henry O’Neill _(General Theopholus Bogardus)_  
Spring Byington _(Mrs Kendrick)_  
John Litel _(Jean La Cour)_  
Gordon Oliver _(Dick Allen)_  
Janet Shaw _(Molly Allen)_  
Theresa Harris _(Zette)_  
Margaret Early _(Stephanie Kendrick)_  
Irving Pichel _(Huger)_  
Eddie Anderson _(Gros Bat)_  
Stymie Beard _(Ti Bat)_  
Lou Payton _(Uncle Cato)_  
George Renevant _(De Lautruc)_

_uncredited_  
Daisy Bufford _(black flower girl)_  
Frederick Burton _(first bank director)_  
Edward McWade _(second bank director)_  
Frank Darien _(bookkeeper)_  
Ann Codee _(Madame Poulard, dressmaker)_  
Suzanne Dulier _(midinette)_  
Jac George _(orchestra leader)_  
Johnny Harron _(Jenkins)_  
Trevor Bardette _(sheriff at plantation)_  
George Guhl _(fugitive planter)_  
Louis Mercier _(bar companion)_  
Phillip Hurlic _(Erronens)_  
Dolores Hurlic _(Errata)_  
Davison Clark _(deputy sheriff)_  
Maurice Brierre, Tony Paton, Jack Norton _(drunks)_  
Alan Bridge _(New Orleans sheriff)_  
Georgia Caine _(Mrs Petion)_  
Fred Lawrence _(Bob)_  
Jacques Vanaire _(Durette)_  
Jesse Graves _(black servant)_  
Charles Wagenheim _(customer)_  
Charles B. Middleton _(officer)_  
Franco Corsaro  
Roger Valmy  
George Sorel  
Vic Demoruelle  
Louis La Bey

USA 1938©  
105 mins

A BFI National Archive print

Please note: this film contains language, images  or other content that reflect views prevalent in its time, but that may cause offence today. The film is included here for historical, cultural or aesthetic reasons and these views are in no way endorsed by the BFI or its partners.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTQ1MDc5NTU4Nl19
-->