

‘Mavis gets a little _rough_ sometimes,’ Bob Dylan once said of the young  
Mavis Staples, according to the woman herself. He was referring to the unexpected grittiness in Staples’s singing voice, one of the factors that distinguished her band, The Staple Singers, from the common run of gospel acts. (Dylan also, according to Staples, made frequent appeals for her hand in marriage, but to no avail: ‘I didn’t really have flirtin’ on my mind back then.’)  
The Staple Singers were set apart too by the particular tremolo guitar sound favoured by bandleader and patriarch Roebuck ‘Pops’ Staples, and by their friendship with the Reverend Martin Luther King. The latter affiliation led to a politicisation of their lyrics and an open commitment to the civil rights movement that was then a rarity among gospel performers.

Jessica Edwards’s efficient documentary draws on the testimony of friends and associates – including Dylan, who notes that, after hearing the Staples’ version of the spiritual ‘Sit Down Servant’, he ‘stayed up for a week’ – to put the life of Mavis Staples in its musical and political context. Personal content is dealt with less fully, giving the film a somewhat arm’s-length feeling; but Staples herself is an irresistibly charming interviewee, and the footage of her singing, both archive and recent, is spine-tingling in its force, grandeur and sheer sense of joy. The degree of love and respect depicted between Staples and the late Pops, meanwhile, challenges the assumption that showbiz families are by necessity riven by dysfunction.

The film details the group’s successful merging of a traditional gospel sound with blues, funk and soul influences over the course of the 1970s, and Mavis’s subsequent solo career. Sexier content challenged their gospel crowd: ‘I was waiting for the church folks to come and get me!’ says Staples of singing the suggestive ‘Let’s Do It Again’, written by Curtis Mayfield. The band’s cross-platform appeal, however, enabled not only a broad fan base but also friendships and musical collaborations across generic boundaries, including an appearance alongside The Band in Martin Scorsese’s _The Last Waltz_ (1978).

Though revered by those who worked with her – ‘I respected and loved  
Aretha Franklin, but she wasn’t no Mavis Staples,’ says Al Bell, who brought The Staple Singers their most fruitful period of mainstream success during his tenure as boss of Stax Records – Mavis struggled to establish a consistent solo identity and faced unfortunate setbacks, as when a brace of albums produced by Prince in the late 1980s and early 1990s were largely overlooked as a result of his dispute with his then record label Warner Brothers. A later career revival with the help of ANTI-Records – an offshoot of Epitaph and a habitual rediscoverer of undervalued older artists – proved more successful, sourcing her a fashionable and devoted new producer in the form of Wilco’s Jeff Tweedy, and netting her a 2010 Grammy Award.

_Mavis!_ takes a respectfully non-intrusive approach to its subject, allowing the singer and her songs to speak for themselves. If the results can feel a touch workmanlike, few would deny that respect is the bare minimum due to the talent depicted. Not that she takes herself overly seriously. ‘That’s the best time I’ve had in years,’ we hear her enthuse to a bandmate after a recent show. ‘Since I got my new knees!’  
**Hannah McGill, _Sight & Sound_, March 2016**



**MAVIS!**  
_Directed by_: Jessica Edwards  
©: Film First Corp.  
_A_ Film First _production_  
_Executive Producer_: Gary Hustwit  
_Executive Producer for HBO_: Sheila Nevins  
_Producers_: Rachel Mills, Jessica Edwards  
_Senior Producer for HBO_: Sara Bernstein  
_Archival Researcher_: Rosemary Rotondi  
_Director of Photography_: Keith Walker  
_Additional Photography_: Alex Allaux, Fred Burns, Daniel Crocetti, Autumn Eakin, Jessica Edwards, Luke Geissbühler, Josh Goleman, Brian Hamm, Jacob Hatley, Colleen Hennesy, Gary Hustwit,  Paul Kelly, Gideon C. Kennedy, Greg Keras, Christopher Knott, Mark Schlicher, Pete Sillen, Michael Swanson, Maya Tippett, Ben Wolf  
_Animation_: Trollbäck+Company  
_Edited by_: Amy Foote  
_Graphic Design and Film Identity_: Small Stuff,  Joe Marianek, Dinah Fried  
_Title Design_: Trollbäck+Company  
_Digital Intermediate Colourist_: Charlie Rokosny  
_Additional Music Composed by_: Rick Holmstrom  
_Music Recording_: Timothy Powell, Joachim Kearns, Paul Kelly  
_Interview Sound Recording_: Andy Black,  Richard Buonagurio, Ron DiCanni, Sharon Frye, Gary Hustwit, Hayden Jackson, Trokon Nagbe, Marshall Potter  
_Sound Mixer_: Lou Teti  
_Sound Editor_: Brian Bracken

**With**

Mavis Staples  
Jeff Tweedy  
Adam ‘Speedy’ Ayres  
Greg Kot  
Anthony Heilbut  
Bonnie Raitt  
Chuck D  
Bob Dylan  
Marty Stuart  
Julian Bond  
Al Bell  
Sharon Jones  
Levon Helm  
Steve Cropper  
Prince

USA 2015©

80 mins
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTkzMDAyNTE2N119
-->