
_Wednesday 14 July’s screening will be introduced by three young poets who will explore names as a source of both power and significance._

**Mira Nair on ‘The Namesake’**

_How did you get involved in_ The Namesake_?_

I read the book by chance on a plane and I recognised a deep sense of loss. I was going to make _Homebody/Kabul_ [a Tony Kushner play] – it was financed, cast and written – but I put it aside. I raised the money for _The Namesake_ on no script, just on the gift of the gab – 1 million bucks. Then in July 2005 we finished a first draft and by the end of August we were shooting. It was madness, but it was a private little madness. It wasn’t like, ‘I’m gonna make an epic’, more, ‘Screw the rest, I’m doing this.’ As one Hollywood person said, it’s a non-Caucasian film on a Caucasian budget.

_What were the main challenges in adapting Jhumpa Lahiri’s bestseller?_

I grew up in Calcutta so I knew it from the inside – as opposed to Jhumpa, who knew it as a visitor. This gave me a strong idea of how to film the city. Jhumpa felt an amazing sense of security because of the things I said to her: details from her book that prompted more details. She almost became the visitor in my childhood backyard.

The book had enough air in it to be filmed in a certain visual way. The key to making a 30-year saga in two hours is in the transitions. Every moment has to maximise the intention and it’s hard to do so without the usual tacky subtitles and voiceovers and crap that I just don’t find cinematic. It’s the visual/emotional axis I need to nail, and here it was about shooting both locations as if they were one. This is the state of being of an immigrant who looks out of the window and sees the Ganges instead of the Hudson. I needed that motif to propel me into the narrative.

_Typical of your insider’s insight is the scene where the ashes are scattered while boys play on the beach._

I’m a shameless populist. In India funerals are always moving for exactly this reason – that children will somersault in the same river in which you throw your husband’s ashes. And there will be a boatman singing the Baul songs, which I have always loved but which have never found a home in my other movies.

_Was there anything in the book that was difficult?_

The character of Gogol is a little passive; I was more interested in his parents. We looked at his litany of love affairs and decided to skip his high-school and college days. There are two major relationships: with Maxine, the American girlfriend he lives with, and later with Moushumi, a would-be sophisticate who wants to be French. I thought that was fabulously unpredictable – and yet I’ve seen her: the slick, re-invented immigrant. I spiced her up a bit with _Bonjour Tristesse_ and other things I used to read when I was that pretentious age.

_Do you consider the difference in emotional temperature between India and the west when you’re making a film like this?_

I go for what comes from me, and that is a medley of these temperatures, knowing that in India we go too much into overt melodrama but also that the core of that melodrama is real. With _Salaam Bombay!_, for instance, I wanted to make a film for the street kids who go to the theatre in Bombay for an air-conditioned three hours. I didn’t want to make an obscure film that Cannes would have loved and no one in Bombay would have seen.

_How do you decide which films to do?_

It’s not always easy. I can’t do full-on bleak and the wonderful thing with  
_The Namesake_ is the rhythm in the audience of belly laughs, then sobs, then laughter again. I thought it was a fluke when I first sat in on an audience but now I’ve seen it four times and what happens is that the laughter allows the sorrow to be sweeter and the sorrow welcomes the laughter all the more.

_The criss-crossing of registers between American action and Indian stillness is very effective._

That’s the point really. I love that stillness of our parents’ generation. There’s nothing else like it, especially in manic America where all of us are constantly checking the phone or the computer. If you have tea with my father-in-law, he will have to talk to you and there’s a gravitas and an openness about life – but only when having tea.

_Tell me about the film’s phrase: ‘We all come out of Gogol’s overcoat.’_

Ashoke believes that the Russian writer Gogol was the precursor of a lot of other stylists such as Chekhov and Dostoevsky, and that therefore we all came out of Gogol’s ‘The Overcoat’. That’s the way Ashoke the intellectual thinks, but Ashoke the father tells his son they are all there because he was saved by Gogol’s book in the train crash.

_My favourite scene is when Ashoke arrives in the sterile university room and arranges his few possessions._

The sterility of the room is not described in the book. That all-white look came from a terrible image I saw when my mother-in-law was in hospital in New York after an operation. Three days into her recovery she went into a convulsion and there was hardly any care. Finally we convinced them that she needed intensive care and then a battery of nurses came and threw us out of her room. An hour later I was told to go back and lock up and when I walked in it was strewn with tubes and wrappers like a tsunami had struck. I opened her closet and there were her perfect Ferragamo shoes and carefully hung saris and this fragrance – an oasis of calm in the chaos – and I knew in that moment that she would never wear those shoes again. I wouldn’t have made this film had I not experienced loss in that primal way.<br>
**Interview by Nick James, _Sight & Sound_, April 2007**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTExNDI1ODYxMjhdfQ==
-->