
The 1960s brought seismic changes to Japanese cinema. In this richly illustrated panel discussion, our special guests will consider how the landscape of Japanese cinema changed between the 1960s and the 1990s. Our invited speakers will explore what films, directors, actors, genres and social and political developments defined each decade, and comment on their impact on Japanese cinema of the 21st century.

**Host: Alexander Jacoby** lectures on the arts and culture of Japan, including film, manga and anime, at Oxford Brookes University. He is the author of  
_A Critical Handbook of Japanese Film Directors_ (2008, Stone Bridge Press) and of a forthcoming monograph on Hirokazu Koreeda, to be published by the BFI and Bloomsbury in 2022. His scholarly essays include contributions to _Japanese Cinema: Texts and Contexts_ (2007, ed. Phillips and Stringer) and _The Japanese Cinema Book_ (2020, ed. Fujiki and Phillips), and his journalism on film and other topics has appeared in various publications including _Sight and Sound_, _The Times_ and _The Japan Times_. He has curated film programmes at the BFI, Il Cinema Ritrovato, Bologna, the Giornate del Cinema Muto, Pordenone, and the Museum of Modern Art, New York.

**Jasper Sharp** is an author, filmmaker and curator known for his work on Asian cinema and the co-founder of the Japanese film website Midnight Eye. His books include _The Midnight Eye Guide to New Japanese Film_ (2004), joint-written with Tom Mes, _Behind the Pink Curtain_ (2008) and _The Historical Dictionary of Japanese Cinema_ (2011). His work has appeared in publications including _Sight and Sound_, _The Guardian_, _The Japan Times_, _Kateigaho_ and _Film International_, and on numerous home video releases. He has a PhD on ‘Japanese Widescreen Cinema: Commerce, Technology and Aesthetics’, examining the introduction of widescreen cinema technologies to Japan during the 1950s. He is the co-director with Tim Grabham of _The Creeping Garden_ (2014), a documentary about plasmodial slime moulds and currently works as a disc producer for Arrow Films.

**Rayna Denison** is Professor of Film and Digital Arts and Head of Department for Film and Television at the University of Bristol. Her research centres on contemporary Japanese animation and cinema. Rayna is the author of _Anime: A Critical Introduction_ (2015), the editor of _Princess Mononoke: Understanding Studio Ghibli’s Monster Princess_ (2018), and the co-editor of the Eisner Award-nominated _Superheroes on World Screens_ (2015). Rayna’s teaching and research examines the intersections between Japanese film and other media, especially animation, and can be found in a wide range of academic journals and books, but she has also appeared on podcasts like Fantasy/Animation and has written for The Conversation.

**Dr Virginie Sélavy** is a film scholar, writer and editor. She is the founder of Electric Sheep Magazine and was co-director of the Miskatonic Institute of Horror Studies – London. She has edited _The End: An Electric Sheep Anthology_ and contributed to _Lost Girls: The Phantasmagorical Cinema of Jean Rollin_ and _Sixties British Cinema Reconsidered_ among various publications. She has written and lectured widely on horror, fantastique and exploitation cinema and runs an annual course on surrealism in film. She is currently working on a book on sado-masochism in 1960s-70s cinema. Her website is www.feminaridens.com.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTY0NTU0NDE1M119
-->