
Whether in Warner Bros Depression-era spectacles like _42nd Street_ (1933), flamboyant offerings such as Powell and Pressburger’s _The Red Shoes_ (1948) or even Carlos Saura’s _Tango_ (1998), it’s a convention of backstage musicals that the lead-up to a new production will always be fraught: the nervous tension will build, the relief come only with performance. With typical iconoclasm, Robert Altman eschews this approach in _The Company_. Master of the freewheeling ensemble piece, he is more interested in how a ballet troupe functions day to day than in delivering melodramatic flourishes or final reel catharsis.<br>

In particular, Altman strives to contrast the formal perfection the dancers seek in performance with the unruliness and banality of their off-stage existences, characterised by Altman in the press notes as ‘the same messy stew that we all experience’. Pitched somewhere between drama and documentary (and shot on high-definition video), _The Company_ is a ‘messy stew’ itself. Barbara Turner’s sprawling screenplay introduces various characters whose stories seem set up for deeper exploration: the young company member reduced to sleeping on a friend’s floor; the veteran ballerina fiercely resistant to change; the choreographer with off-the-wall ideas for a new ballet; the young dancer dropped for not picking up a routine quickly enough. But the narrative style is deliberately elliptical and impressionistic: rather than set out to resolve such dilemmas, Altman uses them as illustrative of the complexities of lived lives. Most of the performers are real members of Chicago’s Joffrey Ballet but Altman is equally oblique in his treatment of the three leads, drawn from outside the profession: rather than dwell on the personal lives of newcomer and would-be principal dancer Ry (played by co-producer Neve Campbell), her sous-chef romantic interest or troupe leader Antonelli, Altman repeatedly cuts away from what are apparently key dramatic sequences to return to the rehearsal room.

The crucial performance sequences are handled admirably: often shooting long, Altman has clearly listened to Fred Astaire’s old dictum that ‘either the camera dances or I do’ and largely resists elaborate montage sequences or editing tricks. We are treated to some extraordinarily expressive routines: Campbell and Domingo Rubio performing a delicate _pas de deux_ on an open-air stage during a thunderstorm, a mesmerising solo dance featuring one of the company members curling herself into wreaths with a rope, the colourful (if kitsch) ‘Blue Snake’ ballet which rounds off the movie.

The stresses and inadvertent comedy of company life are well captured, without romantic illusion. In one telling scene, a ballerina straight out of a Degas suddenly snaps a tendon and, helped off stage, is promptly and unemotionally replaced. Malcolm McDowell’s Antonelli comes across as a camp latter-day Diaghilev, bedecked in a series of yellow and orange scarves, but for all his mannerisms and brusqueness he is presented as a heroic and even visionary figure battling to ensure the company’s welfare and the quality of its members’ performances.<br>
**Geoffrey Macnab, _Sight and Sound_, May 2004**<br>


**Robert Altman on ‘The Company’**

Dancers do the impossible. And yet we all want to be them. They are that beautiful, that vulnerable, and that expressive. They are the essence of what we mean by ethereal. Their lives, of course, are the same messy stew that we all experience, complete with the complications of families, lovers, friendships, and work. I want _The Company_ to show this world with all of its contradictions. Here are world-class artists who, for the most part, are poorly paid and live hand to mouth, often in very unglamorous conditions. They take immaculate care of their bodies while smoking countless cigarettes, downing endless cups of coffee and working punishing hours. Their daily reality includes bloody feet, bludgeoned ambitions, and the work itself – in all of its demanding beauty.

What thrilled me most about making this film was simply being allowed into this particular tribe of artists, dreamers and human beings. On a daily basis, and in the most impossible and dramatic terms, dancers face what we all face: biological clocks and the force of gravity telling us ‘no’. Yet for some part of their working lives dancers literally prevail over those forces. The fact that they (like the rest of us) will all ultimately be trumped by time doesn’t diminish or compromise their efforts. It only enriches them… and us. I am privileged to have been allowed into the world of the dancers of the Joffrey Ballet and privileged to have the opportunity of sharing it in this film.

Production notes

<![endif]-->

**The Company**

_Director_: Robert Altman  
_©_: The Company Productions AG & Co. KG  
_Production Company_: Killer Films  
_In association with_: First Snow Productions, Sandcastle 5 Productions  
_Presented by_: Capitol Films  
_Presented in association with_: CP Medien,

Capitol Films  
_Executive Producers_: Jane Barclay, Sharon Harel, Hannah Leader, John Wells, Roland Pellegrino, Dieter Meyer, S.R.O. Entertainment AG,

Stefan Jonas, Jonas McCord  
_Producers_: David Levy, Joshua Astrachan,

Neve Campbell, Robert Altman, Christine Vachon, Pamela Koffler  
_Line Producer_: Karyn McCarthy  
_Associate Producers_: Jocelyn Hayes,

Lowell Dubrinsky  
_Unit Production Manager_: Karyn McCarthy  
_Production Accountant_: Christi Tidman  
_Location Manager_: Noel Olken  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Sarah Connors  
_1st Assistant Director_: James Giovannetti Jr  
_Script Supervisor_: Drucilla Carlson  
_Casting_: Pam Dixon Mickelson  
_Screenplay_: Barbara Turner  
_Story by_: Neve Campbell, Barbara Turner  
_Director of Photography_: Andrew Dunn  
_Camera Operators_: Robert Reed Altman, Pete Biagi  
_Visual Effects_: Big Film Design  
_Editor_: Geraldine Peroni  
_Additional Editor_: Affonso Gonçalves  
_Production Design_: Gary Baugh  
_Art Director_: Craig Jackson  
_Set Decorator_: Karen Bruck  
_Props Master_: William Dambra  
_Costumes_: Susan Kaufmann  
_Key Make-up Artist_: Jamie Weiss  
_Key Hairstylist_: Agnes Gibicar  
_Title Design_: Big Film Design  
_Digital Intermediate_: EFilm  
_Colour Grader_: Mike Stanwick  
_Original Score Composed by_: Van Dyke Parks  
_Musicians_: The Kronos Quartet: _Violins_: David Harrington, John Sherba; _Viola_: Hank Dutt; _Cello_: Jennifer Culp  
_Musician (Bass)_: Michael Barr  
_Solo Piano Reductions Performed by_: Paul Lewis  
_Production Sound Mixer_: Peter Glossop  
_Boom Operator_: Shaun Mills  
_Re-recording Mixer_: Michael Barry  
_Supervising Sound Editor_: Eliza Paley  
_Sound Editors_: William Sweeney, Tony Martinez, Dan Korintus  
_Supervising Dialogue Editor_: Jac Rubenstein  
_Dolby Sound Consultant_: Steve F.B. Smith

_The Joffrey Ballet of Chicago:_

_Artistic Director_: Gerald Arpino  
_Executive Director_: Jon H. Teeuwissen  
_Artistic Manager_: Harriet Ross

_Company Manager_: Jan Watson

_Production Manager_: Keith Prisco

_Lighting Director_: Kevin Dreyer

_Properties Master_: Jeff Kolack

_Wardrobe Supervisor_: Rebecca Shouse

_Sound Engineer_: Nicholas Gibson

_Cast:_  
_The Joffrey Ballet of Chicago:_  
Neve Campbell _(Ry)_  
Malcolm McDowell _(Alberto Antonelli)_

James Franco _(Josh)_  
The Joffrey Ballet of Chicago _(the company)_ Barbara Robertson _(Harriet)_

William Dick _(Edouard)_

Susie Cusack _(Susie)_  
Marilyn Dodds Frank _(Ry’s mother)_

John Lordan _(Ry’s father)_

Mariann Mayberry _(stepmother)_

Roderick Peeples _(stepfather)_

Yasen Peyankov _(Justin’s mentor)_

_The Joffrey Dancers:_

Davis Robertson _(Alec)_  
Deborah Dawn _(Deborah)_  
John Gluckman _(John)_  
David Gombert _(Justin)_  
Suzanne L. Prisco _(Suzanne)_  
Domingo Rubio _(Domingo Rubio)_  
Emily Patterson _(Noel)_  
Maia Wilkins _(Maia)_  
Sam Franke _(Frankie)_  
Trinity Hamilton _(Trinity)_  
Julianne Kepley _(Julianne)_  
Valerie Robin _(Veronica)_  
Deanne Brown _(Dana)_  
Michael Smith _(Michael)_  
Michael Roy Prescott _(Colton)_  
Lar Lubovitch,  Robert Desrosiers

_(the choreographers)_  
Charthel Arthur,  Cameron Basden

_(the ballet mistresses)_  
Mark Goldweber,  Peter Lockett,  
Adam Sklute _(the ballet masters)_  
Heather Aagard_,_ Michael Anderson_,_

Erica Lynette Edwards_,_ Jennifer Goodman_,_  
Stacy Joy Keller_,_ Calvin Kitten_,_ Peter Kozak_,_

Britt Lazenga_,_ Michael Levine_,_ Brian McSween_,_  
Elizabeth Mertz_,_ Masayoshi Onuki_,_

Samuel Pergande_,_ Will Shives_,_ Erin Smith_,_  
Kathleen Thielhelm_,_ Mauro Villanueva_,_

Yukari Yasui _(the company)_  
Tristan Alberda_,_ Bobby Briscoe_,_  
Orlando Julius Canova_,_ Angelina Sansone_,_  
Jacqueline Sherwood_,_ Jessica Wyatt

_(the apprentices)_  
Michael Andrew Currey_,_ Katherine Selig

_(stage managers)_  
Paul Lewis _(company pianist)_  
Julie O’Connell _(physical therapist)_  
George Darveris _(production manager)_  
Marc Grapey _(toast master)_  
Keith Prisco _(bridegroom)_  
Emma Harrison _(Neo waitress)_  
Dwayne Whitmore _(Neo bouncer)_  
Danny McCarthy _(bartender)_  
Robert Breuler _(barfly)_  
Larry Glazer _(Grant Park cellist)_  
Mark Hummel _(Grant Park pianist)_

USA/UK/Germany 2003

112 mins


**ROBERT ALTMAN: AMERICAN OUTSIDER**

**The Company**

Tue 13 Jul 17:50; Sat 31 Jul 11:50

**The Long Goodbye**

Tue 13 Jul 18:00

**Vincent and Theo**

Tue 13 Jul 20:30

**Kansas City**

Thu 15 Jul 17:40

**The Gingerbread Man**

Sat 17 Jul 17:50

**Short Cuts**

Sat 17 Jul 19:30

**Gosford Park**

Sun 18 Jul 18:20; Fri 23 Jul 14:30

**Prêt-à-porter**

Mon 19 Jul 17:40

**A Prairie Home Companion**

Sun 25 Jul 12:00; Sat 31 Jul 17:50

**Dr T & The Women**

Mon 26 Jul 20:30

**Cookie’s Fortune**

Tue 27 Jul 17:40

**The Player**

Wed 28 Jul 20:30
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbODQ2ODEwMDYzXX0=
-->