**SPOILER WARNING  The following notes give away some of the plot.**

‘Aunt Jewell was murdered!’ Except she wasn’t (and it’s no spoiler to say so). Rather, the murder plot is an elaborate ruse concocted by Jewell’s niece (Glenn Close, amusingly duplicitous and self-righteous) to avoid the scandal of a family suicide – a ruse that ends up implicating Jewell’s close companion and caretaker Willis (Charles S. Dutton).

An absolutely delightful and often hilarious comedy of southern manners and misdemeanours, at once sharply focused and marvellously relaxed, _Cookie’s Fortune_ slipped under the radar at the time of its release. But this film is the definition of a gem, and one that has some slyly subversive things to say about family and race too. A crack cast creates a wonderful comic buzz, from Patricia Neal’s sublime (if all-too-brief) appearance as the eccentric Jewell, Chris O’Donnell’s adorably befuddled and horny cop, Liv Tyler’s independent-minded daughter and Dutton’s warm Willis. Then there’s Julianne Moore, as Close’s oppressed and apparently simple-minded sister, who is liberated by her starring role in a wonderfully shaky amateur production of Oscar Wilde’s _Salomé_.<br>
**Alex Ramon, bfi.org.uk, 11 May 2021**

**A contemporary review**<br>

_Cookie’s Fortune_, Altman’s second ﬁlm on the trot to be set in the Deep South, is in a far more relaxed groove than its predecessor _The Gingerbread Man_.  
It takes the widow Cookie an eternity to walk up and down the staircase of her southern mansion and Altman is determined to show every last step. Likewise, her companion Willis may be falsely accused of her murder, but that doesn’t mean he is going to move in anything other than his usual shufﬂing gait. Altman and his actors take their tempo from the slow, mournful blues which ﬁlls the soundtrack, and it’s only when Ruby Wilson belts out the opening song that the pace picks up.

One character who isn’t in the slightest laid-back is Camille, the arch conspirator and busybody who directs the townsfolk in a truly atrocious Easter pageant production of _Salomé_. Camille’s cast declaim their lines with a dreary solemnity while Camille’s sister Cora hoofs her way through her own clumsy version of the Dance of the Seven Veils. There is something perverse about watching highly accomplished actors pretending to be bungling amateurs, but Camille’s directorial approach doesn’t seem markedly different from that of Altman himself. She shares his morbidity (‘that needs more blood around the neck,’ she complains about the severed head of John the Baptist) and, like Altman, she seems to enjoy working with a large ensemble cast. If her production of _Salomé_ is mannered and a little absurd, so too is _Cookie’s Fortune_.

Anne Rapp’s screenplay tries – not entirely successfully – to undercut its own prevailing mood of whimsy by hinting at the dark events which cloud the protagonists’ lives. This is a tale about a dysfunctional family which could easily have slipped over into Flannery O’Connor-style Southern Gothic. Most of the menfolk seem to be absent – either dead or ﬂed – and those who remain are either vaguely sinister, like Lyle Lovett’s voyeuristic catﬁsh supplier, or downright goofy, like the sheriff’s infatuated deputy.

But Rapp can’t resist poking gentle fun at the foibles of the small-town folk: Cookie smokes a pipe; Willis is obsessed with ﬁshing. The mood is closer to that of Garrison Keillor’s _Lake Woebegone_ than to the pessimism of Raymond Carver (whose stories Altman adapted with such skill and perception in _Short Cuts_). Mild eccentricity reigns. ‘She’s a kinder soul, and has a rare ability to ﬁnd in these characters an authentic, truthful quirkiness,’ the director has observed of Rapp. In trying to be faithful to her screenplay, he risks acting against his own nature: woolly-minded benevolence is not what you expect from the soured old magus. Just as Camille has a neat way of sweeping anything disagreeable under the carpet, Altman chooses not to make too much of an issue out of Camille’s racism or Cookie’s suicide – the latter’s death tums out to be little more than the ‘macgufﬁn’ that sets the plot rolling.

Still, there are neat touches. Altman makes the most of the creaky gun cupboard door which never stays closed, and marks Cookie’s death in mordantly funny fashion with an explosion of feathers. (She shoots herself through a pillow.) Liv Tyler, as the coltish, long-limbed, dulcet-toned Emma, and Charles Dutton as Willis have an easy comic rapport. Their scenes together yield the ﬁlm’s warmest and most likeable moments. Unlike  
_The Gingerbread Man_, which could have been directed by anybody, _Cookie’s Fortune_ does bear Altman’s imprimatur. The old energy and bite may be lacking, but at least this lazy, amiable shaggy-dog story was made in the same freewheeling, idiosyncratic way as Altman’s best work.<br>
**Geoffrey Macnab, _Sight & Sound_, September 1999**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMjI4ODE3ODk4XX0=
-->