

<![endif]-->

In October 1942, Raymond Chandler wrote a letter to Blanche Knopf, wife and associate of his American publisher, in which he described his resentment at having ‘to ride around on [Dashiell] Hammett and James Cain, like an organ grinder’s monkey.’ Hammett is ‘all right’, he allowed, ‘but James Cain – faugh! Everything he touches smells like a billygoat. He is every kind of writer I detest, a _faux naïf_, a Proust in greasy overalls, a dirty little boy with a piece of chalk and a board fence and nobody looking. Such people are the offal of literature, not because they write about dirty things, but because they do it in a dirty way. Nothing hard and clean and cold and ventilated.’

The disingenuously fastidious Chandler wasn’t beyond writing to ‘Dear Jim’ five months later to boast of his and Billy Wilder’s adaptation of Cain’s _Double Indemnity_, a task that had apparently been made harder by the need to sharpen Cain’s ‘remote’ dialogue, or so Chandler graciously informed him.  
The famously agonising collaboration with Wilder paid off, of course, and _Double Indemnity_ remains one of the few noirs that is an undisputed masterpiece, despite its sentimental subplot. The musky _The Postman Always Rings Twice_ (1946), also from Cain, runs it close, and if _Ossessione_ (1943), _Mildred Pierce_ (1945), _Slightly Scarlet_ (1955) and the 1981 _Postman_ remake are lesser Cain adaptations, there’s no question that the prose so reviled by Chandler makes for a potent brand of dank, carnal thriller.

The Coen brothers, whose first film _Blood Simple_ (1983) bore Cain’s narrative imprint, have now made another movie on which Cain was apparently the prime influence. ‘Cain’s stories nearly always had as their heroes schlubs – losers, guys who were involved in rather dreary and banal existences,’ Ethan Coen has said. Accordingly, he and brother Joel made the protagonist of  
_The Man Who Wasn’t There_, set in the northern California town of Santa Rosa (like Hitchcock’s _Shadow of a Doubt_) in 1949, a barber who blackmails and stabs to death the department-store boss Big Dave (James Gandolfini) who has been cuckolding him. As if to underscore the Cain connection, the boss’ wife is the archly named Ann Nirdlinger – thus a cousin of _Double Indemnity_’s Phyllis Nirdlinger, whom Barbara Stanwyck transformed into Glendale siren Phyllis Dietrichson – and a county medical examiner is called Diedrichson.

And yet _The Man Who Wasn’t There_ is unlike the various Cain adaptations.  
In making Billy Bob Thornton’s passive, asexual Ed Crane the hero, the Coens have deliberately kept the chilli powder out of what in other hands might have been a sweat-inducing stew. Early in the film Crane acknowledges in voiceover that he’s none too bothered by his wife’s adultery – ‘It’s a free country’ – and there’s a startling scene towards the close when Scarlett Johansson’s adolescent Birdy tries to thank Ed, who has attempted to sponsor her as a piano student, with a sexual favour he tenderly refuses. Imagine the worn-out Mr Dietrichson as the hero of _Double Indemnity_ instead of Fred MacMurray’s priapic Neff, or the buffoonish Nick the Greek as the hero of the original _Postman_ instead of John Garfield’s virile Frank, and you have a sense of the moralising effect.

Similarly Ed’s wife Doris (Frances McDormand), though promisingly glimpsed from behind as a burnished blonde snapping on a girdle in the scene that introduces her, emerges as a peculiarly dreary adulteress, one who plays bingo, says ‘Love ya, honey’ to Ed while she shaves her legs in the bath and demonstrates no particular desire for her lover. Femmes fatales are supposed to be phantasmic black widows who frequent roadhouses and bars; Doris is an enthusiastic book keeper and a sloppy drunk who eventually stings herself.

Stylistically, meanwhile, the _mise en scène_ of _The Man Who Wasn’t There_ has those exact aesthetic values Chandler missed in Cain’s stories: visually it’s as ‘hard and clean and cold and ventilated’ as the barber’s shop where Ed works. The black-and-white film has been photographed, cut and sound-edited to Kubrickian pristineness: it offers us trails of cigarette smoke spiralling deliberately into a back yard hymned by cicadas; the dappled effect of light shining through trees; Tony Shalhoub’s barnstorming lawyer transfixed in a vault of light as he offers some spurious wisdom; and a flying hubcap that metamorphoses fleetingly into a UFO from a Jack Arnold movie – a 3-D missile from the film’s subtextual paranoia, which destroys Doris and Big Dave and renders Ann Nirdlinger a nut but doesn’t threaten Ed’s equanimity even when he’s doomed.

If classic _films noirs_ are febrile, there’s a case to be made that _The Man Who Wasn’t There_, which is languid to the point of sluggishness, is not only an anti-_noir_ – as if the Coens were trying to catch out all the film reviewers who will inevitably mislabel it – but a puritanical revision of Cain too. Cain’s paradigmatic noir stories were about the feverish desire to make a wish come true and the price that’s paid when it does. In _Postman_ and _Double Indemnity_, Michael Walker has written in _The Movie Book of Film Noir_ (1992), ‘the hero becomes so obsessed sexually by a woman that he is persuaded to murder her husband, and the _noir_ world which he enters is psychological rather than physical, characterised above all by guilt and the fear of discovery.’ Nothing like Ed, in other words.

The somnambulistic barber – ‘it was like I was a ghost walking down the street,’ he reports after Doris meets her fate – is a cypher in his own story, like the Western ‘hero’ nobody noticed in the Pete Atkin / Clive James song ‘Stranger in Town’. As the title suggests, the film is built around a structuring absence. Usually that means the absence of a parent or a spouse, but here it means the absence of ego. So what does Ed want, if not money, success, a prime piece of jailbait or even to be a small-town barber? Or, to frame the question as Ed’s brother-in-law Frank and Big Dave put it, ‘What kind of man are you?’ Although the Coens have Ed voice an existential question about the pointlessness of life when, giving a kid a crew cut, he muses on the inexorability and disposability of human hair, there’s an overriding sense that he wants nothing and is no kind of man but a dead man walking.<br>
**Graham Fuller, _Sight and Sound_, October 2001**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE3MTY4MjkyNDddfQ==
-->