
<![endif]-->

_+ intro by Catherine Wheatley, King’s College London  
(Monday 13 December only)_

**Juzo Itami and Nobuko Miyamoto talk about sex, food and death**

Juzo Itami was born in Kyoto in 1933. His father Mansaku Itami was a well-known film director. Apart from directing and acting, Itami is an essayist. He is married to Nobuko Miyamoto who has major roles in his three feature films.

JUZO ITAMI: I began by acting in films and played a Japanese colonel in Nicholas Ray’s _55 Days at Peking_. It was not at all a happy time for Ray and he was finally taken off the film. The experience left me with no desire whatever to direct a big-budget epic. I have also acted in the theatre, in Shuji Terayama’s _The Strange Mandarin_. Terayama was a good friend and in some ways I feel very close to him, but he was a wild schizophrenic and compared with him I am very commonsensical. And I appeared in Oshima’s _Japanese Pornographic Songs_. You could say our preoccupations are similar, but Oshima looks at things from a very different point of view from my own.

The concern with ritual, with the correct way of doing things, is probably a common element in my work. We enter a world in which the rules governing things already exist. I see human beings as always prey to feelings of isolation. There doesn’t seem to be a perfect fit between themselves and the outside world. Rules are to do with the alignment of the self and the world.

For a long time, I wanted to make a film about food and eating. The idea is already there in _The Funeral_, in the scene in which the old man who is going to die returns from seeing his doctor in Tokyo having been given a clean bill of health, with a selection of delicacies for the evening meal. After that he has a heart attack. Food too is governed by rules regarding its preparation and consumption. Food also has an erotic side; it is a physical pleasure. And once there are rules and taboos, there exists at once the possibility of breaking those rules. I thought this possibility would introduce a note of suspense.

Originally, I wanted to structure my second film, _Tampopo_, around a series of anecdotes about food. It was supposed to work like a kind of endless nightmare, with one story shading into another leaving no possibility of escape. I wrote some 30 episodes and tried to arrange them in various sequences to give the film some sense of development, but it didn’t work. It was spineless. It needed a strong plot, a clear narrative, and suddenly I had the idea of using a Western story. I thought of a stranger riding into town, finding a shabby restaurant, turning it into the best in town, and drifting away again. The plot, of course, is straight from Howard Hawks’ _Rio Bravo_ in which everyone tries to help John Wayne, who doesn’t want help. His character was the prototype for Goro.

In _The Funeral_, my first film, the family must undertake a ritual which originated within a very different kind of community, a traditional community. Japan is, of course, no longer such a society even though foreigners tend to see us that way. It is a very highly developed capitalist consumer society and our behaviour and our ways of thought are quite different. The film shows the difficulties that arise when contemporary Japanese are asked to perform rituals associated with a society with which they no longer have much in common.

Goro says that he is not from a good home and that he doesn’t know how to behave in one. He understands the right way to do things and can recognise excellence, as can all the other characters in the film. In some ways, Japan is a very egalitarian society – it is understood that culinary excellence is not a matter of cost – and he turns a mediocre restaurant into an excellent one and then leaves. The other anecdotes, the sequences with the couple in the hotel room who explore the erotic aspect of food, or the lesson in etiquette, or the story of the wife who on her husband’s command leaves her deathbed to cook a meal, only to expire as it is served while the husband cries out ‘Eat! Eat! It is mother’s last meal!’, all those anecdotes fall into place around this main story.

My latest film, _A Taxing Woman_, is also about the enforcing of strict rules, this time to do with money. It is about the struggle between those who collect taxation and those who avoid payment.

NABUKO MIYAMOTO: I play the ‘taxing woman’ of the title, a tax inspector. Although I have been acting since the 60s in theatre and television as well as film, my roles until _The Funeral_ were fairly minor ones. In _The Funeral_, the part I played was very close to my own life. I had just lost my father and the house used in the film was my own. It was very difficult for me to maintain a distance between myself and my personal feelings and the character in the film.

_Tampopo_ was quite different. I tried to suggest a very jolly sort of person who dedicates herself to the perfecting of a particular task. The image I had in mind was the sort of woman who works in McDonald’s. I tried to make her not too Japanese but more dry and less emotional. She is a woman who is led and protected by a man. In _A Taxing Woman_, my character is a very professional woman, a woman completely at home within the professional world, a woman who can act independently.

Interview by Verina Glaessner, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, April 1988
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbODg5MTEyMDcyXX0=
-->