

_Followed by a panel discussion with poet and writer Hannah Lowe, writer and broadcaster Kevin Le Gendre, and poet Raymond Antrobus. Chaired by actor Burt Caesar._

Reuniting Cameron with director Basil Dearden after _Pool of London_, and hastened into production following the Notting Hill riots of summer 1958, _Sapphire_ continued Dearden and producer Michael Relph’s valuable run of ‘social problem’ pictures, this time using a murder-mystery plot as a vehicle to sharply probe contemporary attitudes to race. Cameron’s role here is relatively small, but, playing the brother of the biracial murder victim of the title, the actor makes his mark in a couple of memorable scenes. Like Dearden’s later _Victim_ (1961), _Sapphire_ was scripted by the undervalued Janet Green.  
**Alex Ramon, bfi.org.uk**

_Sapphire_ is a graphic portrayal of ethnic tensions in 1950s London, much more widespread and malign than was represented in Dearden’s _Pool of London_ (1951), eight years earlier. The film presents a multifaceted and frequently surprising portrait that involves not just ‘the usual suspects’, but is able to reveal underlying insecurities and fears of ordinary people. _Sapphire_ is also notable for showing a successful, middle-class black community – unusual even in today’s British films.

Dearden deftly manipulates tension with the drip-drip of revelations about the murdered girl’s life. Sapphire is at first assumed to be white, so the appearance of her black brother Dr Robbins (Earl Cameron) is genuinely astonishing, provoking involuntary reactions from those he meets, and ultimately exposing the real killer. Small incidents of civility and kindness, such as that by a small child on a scooter to Dr Robbins, add light to a very dark film.

Earl Cameron reprises a role for which he was famous, of the decent and dignified black man, well aware of the burden of his colour. His character is in stark contrast to the gangster caricature of Horace Big Cigar (Robert Adams), or the violent presence of Johnnie Fiddle (Harry Baird). Gordon Heath, a star of stage and screen, gives a scene-stealing performance as dandy Paul Slade.

Despite his intelligent handling of the issues, Dearden is not immune to prevailing prejudices, equating a young woman living alone in London with promiscuity, and seeing an enthusiasm for jazz as evidence of dubious character. The film is littered with casual, unchallenged racism: sexy petticoats found in Sapphire’s room are evidence of ‘the black under the white’.  
A landlady justifies evicting Sapphire by saying ‘Would you be pleased, Inspector, if someone gave you a brass sovereign?’

It is easy to criticise attitudes from a distant past. _Sapphire_ was made shortly after the 1958 Notting Hill riots. The film was also on the cusp of the more permissive 60s. As such it is a cultural and social litmus of the age. Though critic Nina Hibbin writing about _Sapphire_ in the _Daily Worker_ (9 May 1959) expected more from a director signed up to the liberal cause:

‘You can’t fight the colour bar merely by telling people it exists. You have to attack it, with passion and conviction. Commit yourself up to the hilt. Otherwise you’re in danger of fanning the flames.’  
**Ann Ogidi, BFI Screenonline, screenonline.org.uk**

**Hannah Lowe** is a poet and writer, and lecturer in Creative Writing at Brunel University. Her pamphlet _The Hitcher_ (The Rialto, 2011) was widely praised. Her first book-length collection _Chick_ (Bloodaxe Books, 2013) won the 2015 Michael Murphy Memorial Prize, was shortlisted for the Forward Prize for Best First Collection, the Fenton Aldeburgh First Collection Prize and the Seamus Heaney Centre Prize for Poetry, and was selected for the Poetry Book Society’s Next Generation Poets 2014 promotion. This was followed by two pamphlets, _R x_ (sine wave peak, 2013) and _Ormonde_ (Hercules Editions, 2014), and her family memoir _Long Time No See_ (Periscope, 2015). Her second full-length collection, _Chan_, was published by Bloodaxe in 2016, followed by a pamphlet, _The Neighbourhood_ (Out-Spoken Press) in 2019.  
Her third full collection, _The Kids_ (Bloodaxe Books, 2021), is the Poetry Book Society Choice for Autumn 2021. She has been poet in residence at Keats House, and in 2020 she received a Cholmondeley Award from the Society  
of Authors.

**Kevin Le Gendre** is a British journalist, broadcaster and author whose work focuses on Black music. He is deputy editor of _Echoes_ magazine, has written for a wide range of publications, including _Jazzwise_, _MusicWeek_, _Vibrations_ and _The Independent on Sunday_ and is a contributor to such radio programmes as BBC Radio 3’s _J to Z_ and BBC Radio 4’s _Front Row_. At the 2009 Parliamentary Jazz Awards Le Gendre was chosen as ‘Jazz Journalist of the Year’. He is the author of _Soul Unsung: Reflections on the Band in Black Popular Music_ (2012), _Don’t Stop the Carnival: Black British Music: Vol 1 from the Middle Ages to the 1960s_ (2018) and _Hear My Train a Comin’: The Songs of Jimi Hendrix_ (2020).

**Raymond Antrobus** is the author of _Shapes & Disfigurements_ (Burning Eye, 2012) _To Sweeten Bitter_ (Out-Spoken Press, 2017), _The Perseverance_ (Penned In The Margins / Tin House, 2018) and _All the Names Given_ (Picador / Tin House, 2021). In 2019 he became the first ever poet to be awarded the Rathbone Folio Prize for best work of literature in any genre. Also in 2019, his poem ‘Jamaican British’ was added to the UK’s GCSE syllabus. Other accolades include the Ted Hughes award, PBS Winter Choice, A _Sunday Times_ Young Writer of the Year award, Somerset Maugham award and  The Guardian Poetry Book of the Year 2018, as well as a shortlist for the Griffin Prize and Forward Prize. His poems have been published in _POETRY_, _Poetry Review_, _Lit Hub_, _New Statesman_, _The Deaf Poets Society_, among others. His poetry has appeared on BBC2, BBC Radio 4, _The Big Issue_, _The Jamaica Gleaner_, _The Guardian_ and at TedxEastEnd. His debut children’s picture book _Can Bears Ski?_ is illustrated by Polly Dunbar and is published in the UK by Walker Books (2021) and in the US/Canada by Candle Wick Press (2020).  It was selected as a Ezra Jack Keats honoree winner in 2021.

**Burt Caesar** is a director and an actor in film and in theatre. His acting credits in film include _The Amnesty Files_, _Scoop_, and _Exorcist: The Beginning_, directed by Paul Schrader. He has directed several film shorts and directed extensively in television drama. Recent TV appearances include in _Unforgotten_ and _Death_ _in Paradise_. He has performed in the West End and on Broadway (_Serious_ _Money_), and at the Royal Court Theatre, National Theatre, Edinburgh Lyceum and Theatre Royal Stratford East amongst others, including in some plays of Shakespeare. He is a former Associate Director at the Royal Court Theatre.

As an educator he has taught/directed at BFI, Rada, Central St Martin’s/UAL, Met Film School, Farnham Film School and elsewhere, plus, in the USA, with Tim Reid’s Legacy Media Institute.
<br><br>

**SAPPHIRE**  
_Directed by_: Basil Dearden  
©: Artna Films Ltd  
_Presented by_: The Rank Organisation  
_Executive Producer_: Earl St. John  
_Produced by_: Michael Relph  
_Production Manager_: Douglas Peirce  
_Production Controller for Pinewood Studios_:  Arthur Alcott  
_Assistant Director_: David Orton  
_Continuity_: Tilly Day  
_Original Screenplay by_: Janet Green  
_Additional Dialogue by_: Lukas Heller  
_Director of Photography_: Harry Waxman  
_Camera Operator_: H.A.R. Thomson  
_Editor_: John D. Guthridge  
_Art Director_: Carmen Dillon  
_Costume Designer_: Julie Harris  
_Make-up_: W.T. Partleton  
_Music by_: Philip Green  
_Title Song Lyrics_: Sonny Miller  
_Title Song Sung by_: Jimmy Lloyd  
_[Music] Played by_:  Johnny Dankworth and His Orchestra  
_Sound Recordists_: Dudley Messenger, Bill Daniels  
_Sound Assistant_: Harry Fairbairn *  
_Sound Editor_: Arthur Ridout  
_Sound System_: Westrex Recording System  
_Made at_: Pinewood Studios

**Cast**  
Nigel Patrick _(Superintendent Robert Hazard)_  
Yvonne Mitchell _(Mildred)_  
Michael Craig _(Inspector Phil Learoyd)_  
Paul Massie _(David Harris)_  
Bernard Miles _(Ted Harris)_  
Olga Lindo _(Mrs Harris)_  
Earl Cameron _(Dr Robbins)_  
Gordon Heath _(Paul Slade)_  
Jocelyn Britton _(Patsy)_  
Harry Baird _(Johnnie Fiddle)_  
Orlando Martins _(barman)_  
Rupert Davies _(Jack Ferris)_  
Freda Bamford _(Sergeant Cook)_  
Robert Adams _(Horace Big Cigar)_  
Yvonne Buckingham _(Sapphire Robbins)_  
Basil Dignam _(Dr M. Burgess)_ *  
Peter Vaughan _(plainclothesman Whitehead)_ *  
Victor Brooks _(Sergeant Newton)_ *  
Fenella Fielding _(manageress of lingerie shop)_ *  
Thomas Baptiste  *  
Fay Craig, Fay Sparks _(dancers)_ *

UK 1959©  
93 mins

*Uncredited
<br><br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMjg0NjIzODczXX0=
-->