

When John Carpenter’s _The Thing_ was unleashed into cinemas in 1982, it received an almost unanimous critical drubbing on both sides of the Atlantic. Critic after critic griped about weak characterisation, lack of tension, and sacrifice of the film’s mood and structure to the stomach-turning special effects. More than one reviewer dismissed it glibly but not very accurately as ‘_Alien_ on ice’. The consensus was that Carpenter’s _The Thing_ couldn’t – as _Rolling Stone_ put it – ‘hold a candle to Howard Hawks’ trailblazing 1951 classic _The Thing from Another World_’.

One or two brave souls swam against the critical tide. Alan Frank in the _Daily Star_ maintained ‘You won’t find a better spine-chiller than _The Thing_,’ while Richard Cook in _New Musical Express_ remarked on its ‘sense of fatality’, praised Carpenter’s ‘manipulation of the _confining_ qualities of film’, and declared that it set ‘the standard by which all creature thrillers will have to  
be judged’.

But _The Thing_ went belly-up at the box-office, and not just because of the overwhelming blanket of negative criticism. Just as likely to have been a factor was the prevailing mood of the times. In 1982, the political philosophies of Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher were filtering through to the masses, resulting in an overall feeling a long way from John Carpenter’s ironic, subversive, anti-authoritarian tone. Even in the 80s, Carpenter’s films evinced a cynical sensibility more in tune with the innovative, iconoclastic 70s, with their conspiracy theories and downbeat endings, than with the Mammon-worshipping workaholism of the yuppie decade.

Even more damaging, from _The Thing_’s point of view, was the arrival on the scene of a small, prune-like creature with an elongated neck, enormous eyes and magic finger. Audiences weren’t keen on the idea of a space monster which did unpleasant things to the human body. They preferred an alien equivalent of the teddy-bear and wanted reassurance that, if there _were_ something out there, it would be benign. They also wanted the promise of life after death, the comfort of religious undertones, and a heartwarming love story with a sob-into-your-hanky sentimental ending. ‘You must remember the time it [_The Thing_] was released was the summer of _E.T._,’ says John Carpenter. ‘And it was a very bleak and hopeless film. There were no women in the movie, and people thought I went too far.’

When _The Thing_ first came out, I was bowled over by it. I was transfixed by the tension all the critics had maintained was non-existent; the build-up made me so nervous that I thought I would have to leave the cinema even before the first hint of tentacle. I was knocked out by Dean Cundey’s spare yet elegant widescreen cinematography. And I was impressed by the economical but effective performances from a cleverly chosen cast which, together with Bill Lancaster’s deft screenplay, never for one moment left you stranded in limbo, trying to work out which character was which.

I have since watched this film so many times, both on video and on the big screen, that I now know virtually every syllable of Lancaster’s dialogue, every last beat of Ennio Morricone’s haunting music, every conjuring trick of Carpenter’s direction. And yet I can still watch it with pleasure, its tension unimpaired by familiarity. _The Thing_ has carved itself a niche in that small pantheon of films that need to be revisited at regular intervals if I am to preserve my faith in the movies and keep myself sane. It goes on waving its repulsive yet fascinating tentacles in my face. I continue to mull over plot details, wondering which characters have been infected, and when; I brood about the maddening, ambiguous, magnificent ending; and I ponder the philosophical questions: at what point does a human being cease to be a human being and become a Thing? And what would be so awful about being a Thing anyway?

It starts off as it means to go on – a Technicolor film with a predominantly monochrome colour scheme. Later on, there will be vivid eruptions of red, green and yellow gloop, but in the beginning _The Thing_ consists of plain white credits against a black background: black and white – the predominant colour scheme of the film. It’s not so much the black and white of good and evil, as a chess game between two unevenly matched players: a beginner versus a Grandmaster or man versus the Thing, with the Thing making all the best and most unexpected moves.

There’s a single ominous chord on the soundtrack – a chord which gains  
in intensity.

The black background becomes outer space, sprinkled with the pinpricks of millions of stars. This is the Outer Space Prologue, and though we don’t yet know it, it’s set hundreds of thousands of years ago. Flying past us, hurtling past the camera with frightening force and speed, comes what is unmistakably a flying saucer, apparently out of control. It breaches the earth’s atmosphere with a brief flare-up of brightness, and the title of the film is seared white-hot into the screen with a scorching, rending sound. The logo is identical to that used in _The Thing from Another World_. The aliens, once again, have landed.

Carpenter was to use another Outer Space Prologue two years later in _Starman_, a sci-fi love story featuring Jeff Bridges as a benign alien about as far as one could get from the impersonal malevolence of the Thing: the Voyager II space probe, laden with messages of goodwill and launched in 1977, is shown hurtling through space, belting out ‘I Can’t Get No Satisfaction’ by the Rolling Stones. As befits what might be described as Carpenter’s own _E.T._, the tone here is upbeat and positive, totally lacking in the ominousness of _The Thing_’s beginning, which was to be echoed more closely in the Outer Space Prologue to the 1996 box-office smash _Independence Day_, in which the surface of the moon is rippled by the passing of a colossal space craft.

Next, _The Thing_ takes a mighty leap forward in time, to the present – or at least to the present as it was in the year of the film’s release. A subtitle identifies the time and location as ‘ANTARCTIC, WINTER 1982’. The single ominous chord now gives way to the main theme of Ennio Morricone’s simple but insidiously effective soundtrack – a tonic heartbeat overlaid with a repeating two-note figure rising from the dominant 5th to an unsettled and unsettling minor 6th, with a falling sequence beneath it. Carpenter wrote his own synthesizer themes for many of his films, and it’s almost as though Morricone had studied the scores for _Assault on Precinct 13_, _Halloween_, _The Fog_, and so on, and had determined to outdo them in minimalism and menace. _The Thing_ is among his least typical scores – very different from his usual plaintive lyricism – but one of his most effective. The heartbeat at its centre suggests life – but not necessarily life as we would want to know it.  
Extracted from _The Thing_ by Anne Billson (BFI Film Classics, 1997).  
Reproduced by kind permission of Bloomsbury Publishing. ©Anne Billson

<![endif]-->

**The Thing**

_Directed by:_ John Carpenter

©: Universal City Studios, Inc.

_a_ Turman-Foster Company _production_

_a_ Universal _picture_

_Executive Producer:_ Wilbur Stark

_Produced by:_ David Foster, Lawrence Turman

_Co-producer:_ Stuart Cohen

_Associate Producer:_ Larry Franco

_Production Manager:_ Robert Latham Brown

_Production Accountant:_ Karen Miller

_Production Secretary:_ Debbie Collier

_1st Assistant Director:_ Larry Franco

_2nd Assistant Director:_ Jeffrey Chernov

_Assistant to John Carpenter:_ Ellen Benjamin

_Script Supervisor:_ Candy Marcellino

_Casting by:_ Anita Dann

_Screenplay by:_ Bill Lancaster

_Based on the story ‘Who Goes There?’ by:_

John W. Campbell Jr

_Director of Photography:_ Dean Cundey

_Camera Operator:_ Raymond Stella

_First Assistant Cameraman:_ Clyde Bryan

_Second Assistant Cameraman:_ Steve Tate

_Gaffers:_ Mark Walthour, Tom Marshall

_Electric Best Boy:_ Charles E. Nippell

_Key Grip:_ Ronald T. Woodward

_Best Boy Grip:_ Laszlo Horvath

_Grip:_ Ray Kinzer

_Dolly Grip:_ Kriss Krosskove

_Special Visual Effects by:_ Albert Whitlock

_Matte Photography by:_ Bill Taylor

_Special Effects:_ Roy Arbogast

_Special Effects Assistants:_ William D. Lee,

Hans Metz, John Stirber

_Special Effects Foreman:_ Hal Bigger

_Computer Graphics:_ Motion Graphics

_Dimensional Animation Effects Created by:_

Randall William Cook

_Dimensional Animation Effects Crews:_

James Aupperle, James Belohovek,  
Ernest D. Farino, Carl Surges

_Edited by:_ Todd Ramsay

_Assistant Film Editors:_ Jan Wesley, Kim Ray

_Production Designer:_ John J. Lloyd

_Art Director:_ Henry Larrecq

_Set Decorator:_ John Dwyer

_Leadman:_ Bart Susman

_Property Master:_ John Zemansky

_Propmaker Foreman:_ Bob Nohles

_Painter:_ James Callan

_Costume Supervisors:_ Ronald I. Caplan,

Gilbert Loe

_Make-up:_ Kenneth Chase

_Special Make-up Effects Created and Designed by:_ Rob Bottin

_Special Make-up Effects Unit Line Producer:_

Eric Jensen

_Special Make-up Effects Unit Coordinator Mechanical Animation:_ David Kelsey

_Special Make-up Effects Unit Coordinator Special Make-up Effects:_ Ken Diaz

_Special Make-up Effects Unit Production Special Make-up Effects Unit Special Technicians:_ Gunnar Ferdinansen, Margaret Beserra

_Special Wigs:_ Vivienne Walker, Josephine Turner

_End Titles & Optical Effects:_ Universal Title

_Main Title Sequence Visual Effects Designed by:_ Visual Concept Engineering, Peter Kuran

_Visual Concept Engineering Miniature Supervisor:_ Susan K. Turner

_Visual Concept Engineering Animators:_

Katherine Kean, Keith Tucker

_Opticals:_ RGB Opticals, James Hagedorn,

George Lockwood

_Filmed in:_ Panavision

_Colour by:_ Technicolor

_Music by:_ Ennio Morricone

_Synthesizer Sound:_ Craig Harris

_Music Editor:_ Clif Kohlweck

_Production Sound:_ Thomas Causey

_Boom Operator:_ Joe Brennan

_Sound Re-recording:_ Bill Varney, Steve Maslow, Gregg Landaker

_Supervising Sound Editors:_ David Lewis Yewdall, Colin C. Mouat

_Sound Editor:_ Kendrick P. Sweet

_Sound Effects Editor:_ Warren Hamilton Jr

_Foley Supervisor:_ John K. Adams

_Stunt Co-ordinator:_ Dick Warlock

_Juneau Technical Adviser:_ Dr Maynard M. Miller

_Animal Trainer:_ Bob Weatherwax

_Cast:_

Kurt Russell _(R.J. MacReady)_

A. Wilford Brimley _(Blair)_

T.K. Carter _(Nauls)_

David Clennon _(Palmer)_

Keith David _(Childs)_

Richard Dysart _(Dr Copper)_

Charles Hallahan _(Norris)_

Peter Maloney _(Bennings)_

Richard Masur _(Clark)_

Donald Moffat _(Captain Garry)_

Joel Polis _(Fuchs)_

Thomas Waites _(Windows)_

Norbert Weisser _(Norwegian)_

Larry Franco _(Norwegian passenger with rifle)_

Nate Irwin _(helicopter pilot)_

William Zeman _(pilot)_

John Carpenter _(Norwegian in video footage)_ *

Adrienne Barbeau _(voice of computer)_ *

USA 1982©

109 mins

* Uncredited

A new edition of _The Thing_ by Anne Billson is available to pre-order from the BFI Shop: **https://shop.bfi.org.uk/pre-order-the-thing-1982-bfi-film-classics-paperback.html**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTcyODgyMDc2Nl19
-->