
<![endif]-->

In one of _In the Cut_’s early scenes, English professor Frannie is teaching her students about Virginia Woolf’s _To the Lighthouse_. They look bored, apathetic. One complains that all that happens in the book is ‘some old lady dies’. Frannie asks how many women have to die to make it interesting. ‘At least three,’ comes the reply. A sensuous study of desire and masochism wrapped around a straight-up thriller (or perhaps vice-versa), _In the Cut_ gives us three murdered women to keep these students interested while director Jane Campion attends to more troubling preoccupations. The result is one of her most provocative and complex films yet.

Largely faithful to Susanna Moore’s compelling if slightly airless novel, _In the Cut_ plays out like _Bluebeard_ meets _Sea of Love_ for the _Sex and the City_ generation. Meg Ryan’s Frannie and her half-sister Pauline are urban singletons, almost burnt out with bad relationships. Pauline, who lives above a friendly strip bar, has started specialising in safely unavailable married men while Frannie is practically celibate. Their distrust of men seems to have set in early due to a caddish father, seen courting Frannie’s mother on a frozen lake in an oneiric flashback in which his skates score lines of blood into the ice and later amputate her mother’s legs, surreal touches reminiscent of the fantasy sequences in Campion’s _The Portrait of a Lady_.

Nearly every man here has the potential to transmute into a killer, from Frannie’s student Cornelius with his John Wayne Gacy obsession, to her ex John Graham, an actor training to be a doctor and therefore familiar enough with anatomy to ‘disarticulate’ (an apt word in a film preoccupied with language) women’s limbs. Even Frannie’s love interest, the elusive Detective Malloy who promises Frannie he can be ‘whoever [she] wants him to be’, shows a disturbing side while joking with his partner Rodriguez (who himself tried to kill his wife). They josh that all men need from a woman is a ‘hole, tits and a heartbeat’. Upping the misogynist ante, Malloy observes, ‘You don’t even need the tits.’ Rodriguez goes one further: ‘Or the heartbeat.’

What makes the film so provocative is that the more things point to Malloy being the killer, the more Frannie is drawn to him, turned on not just by his cunnilingus technique but also by his potentially lethal power. A woman of few, choice words, attracted to a man with a gift for spiel and animal magnetism, Frannie’s relationship with Malloy recalls the sexual chemistry between Holly Hunter’s mute, cerebral Ada and Harvey Keitel’s gone-native Baines in  
_The Piano_. The sex scenes are especially pungent, scored with a kind of electronic keening on the soundtrack, and marked by a fetid grubbiness in the set design. The outstanding use of New York locations emphasises the sweltering atmosphere: scenes are observed as if through a heat haze of desire. The work of cinematographer Dion Beebe (_Holy Smoke_) is nothing less than extraordinary. Particularly innovative is the use of the travelling focal point that defocuses most of an image apart from one key detail in the frame, suggesting a sort of ecstatic subjectivity, a correlative of the ‘bitch vision’ Cornelius boasts of mastering in his prose. The poetic look of the movie interlocks nicely with its literary sensibility. Frannie’s eye is often drawn to the poems posted on the subway, which comment obliquely on the action.

As finely wrought as _In the Cut_ is, one could argue that it fails as a genre exercise. Experienced thriller fans will guess the killer quicker than it takes to recite an Emily Dickinson poem. But once the mystery’s burned away, what’s left is a minutely etched study in mood and female psychology.

Leslie Felperin, _Sight & Sound_, November 2003

**Jane Campion on ‘In the Cut’**

In the cut_, much like_ The Piano _and_ The Portrait of a Lady_, deals with female masochism._

I think I relate to emotional masochism rather than physical because I hate to hurt myself or to see someone else hurting themselves. Susanna Moore’s book is quite nihilistic and deals directly with female self-sacrifice – even when she’s dying (which she does in the book), the lead character Frannie is imagining how her male killer would see her, wondering if he’d notice she’d scratched him and his flesh is under her fingernails. In our culture male ideas so dominate our psyches we tend to think of ourselves through a male screen. It’s inherent in the myths of romance and love we live with – if you haven’t got a man loving you or you’re not in a relationship it’s as if you’re not alive, as if what happens to you has no value.

_You seem to be developing a riposte to existing gender mythologies._

I enjoyed making this film because I got the opportunity to read a lot of poems and to think about love, romance and sex and how they’ve infested people’s psyches. And it’s not often you see sex on screen that’s designed to be pleasurable for the woman.

_Meg Ryan reinvents herself as an actress to play Frannie, much as Nicole Kidman did in_ The Portrait of a Lady_. Is it important for you to find new aspects to your actors?_

I think Nicole had got stuck in a string of bad Hollywood movies that were depressing her, and Meg felt the same. She’d started getting acting coaching and a coach called Sandra Secat called me and said I should audition her. I hadn’t thought of her, but she’s an amazingly emotional actress.

_She has referred to_ Klute _as an inspiration for her acting style, but there’s also an aspect of Nicole Kidman there. Was that deliberate?_

They look similar, but we didn’t try to make her look like Nicole. We did think of Jane Fonda in _Klute_ and also of Antonioni’s styling in _Blowup_. I looked at Coppola’s _The Rain People_ as well for its _vérité_ style and at _The Godfather_ for the acting style.

_You’ve combined a naturalistic acting style with rich textures in the cinematography._

It’s an observing camera most of the time. I did storyboard it, but tended to throw them away and find the scene as we were doing it. And we were very influenced by the locations.

_The film couldn’t be set anywhere but New York._

New York is a magnet for hopes and dreams, as well as a port where people who once had those dreams still hang around. I think of Pauline as a veteran of too many sexual adventures. She isn’t dismal, though – she has problems but she’s intelligent about them.

_The city is very eroticised in the film._

Much of the eroticism comes from the locations dictated by the story. Pauline lives above a strip joint, and the one we used actually exists. We knocked on the door of the flat above it and there were students living there. The red lighthouse is clearly a phallic symbol, but with all these images I tried not to oversweat them. What I focused on was getting the detective story working well in the hope everything else would take care of itself.

Jane Campion interviewed by Lizzie Francke, _Sight & Sound_, November 2003
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTkzNTk5MDAzN119
-->