**SPOILER WARNING  The following notes give away some of the plot.**<br>

**Roman Polanski on ‘Chinatown’**<br>

_Despite the fact that you began filmmaking at the time of the Nouvelle Vague, you always seemed to have worked to a very precise script._

The script is essential. Filmmaking is too complicated to leave things for improvisation, that’s just for amateurs. How can you improvise when you need specific props for a scene, or you have to work on a specific location? When I go on the floor of the studio, I have no time to think of what’s wrong or right. It has to be already down there so when I’m lost I can pick up the script, open it and look at it like a book of instructions.

_But isn’t it true that you did not have an ending for_ Chinatown _until very late in the day?_

I had neither the ending nor the love scene when we started shooting. Robert Towne never wanted the main characters to go to bed, and he didn’t want her to die in the end. We had a hard time agreeing on that ending. Working on this script was so difficult and gruelling that we started shooting before the script was redrafted.

In the first two drafts, the culprit Noah Cross was caught. In the second draft, he was even killed inside a huge fish, which was a sign! But beginning shooting in this way was only possible because Robert Evans was producer of the film and at the same time head of the studio, so he could give us the green light. Finally he said, ‘Come on Roman, we have to have an ending!’ There were very few scenes left to shoot. It all became very dodgy. I had always worried about there being no scene in Chinatown to justify the title, and since Chinatown in Los Angeles no longer exists, I got Richard Sylbert to build this set for me. I asked Jack [Nicholson] to help come up with some lines – he’s very good at that and so we shot it with her death.

Roman Polanski talking to David Thompson, _Sight and Sound_, April 1995

**A contemporary review**

From _Knife in the Water_ to _Repulsion_; from _Cul de Sac_ to _Rosemary’s Baby_; from _What?_ to _Chinatown_: the teasing see-saw of Polanski’s career still confounds the prognostications as to how the surrealist imagination will finally either have to part company with or be swallowed by the genre formulas.  
The symmetry, of course, is not perfect; _Dance of the Vampires_ and _Macbeth_ straddle both categories, and the balance might already have been tipped if Polanski had worked on such intriguing, projected subjects as a Western on the Donner Pass tragedy, or completed such puzzling, abortive ones as _The Day of the Dolphin_. But the most recent couplet of films satisfyingly demonstrate that not only can the director move, integrity intact, between the two styles, but can also weld them near-seamlessly together. _What?_, an unquestionably personal, probably over-precious doodle on the traps of time and the fallacies of identity, and _Chinatown_, a solid, many-layered detective puzzle on lives intersecting in past, present and future, might be two sides of the same coin.

It is also satisfying that of all his genre pieces, _Chinatown_ is Polanski’s most complete and self-sufficient. A vintage private eye thriller (and not – note the modest number of contemporary tunes – a nostalgic reverie on the same), the film is rendered scrupulously in period from the way it looks – the black-and-white credits, the clothes, the décor – to the way it moves, with its cynical investigator gradually drawn to the mystery of the central female character, only to withdraw at the story’s end from involvement in the lives he has crossed and consign them to a bleak, professional hinterland: ‘Forget it Jake, it’s Chinatown’.

Yet it is also undeniably modernised: through neither a lengthening of perspective nor a recombination of the ingredients (vide Altman’s _Long Goodbye_), but a strange distension of the framework, a stretching of the moral and physical spaces of the story (the Panavision format being an apt metaphor for what has happened to the Chandler world). The drought-stricken city of Los Angeles itself looms uncommonly large. ‘Los Angeles is a desert community’, announces one speaker at a civic meeting near the beginning, when the major plot issue of a dam that will provide irrigation and ‘keep the desert from our streets and not on them’ is first raised. From Robert Towne’s witty, oblique treatment of the political manoeuvring and land grabbing that is to determine the growth of the city, Polanski extracts and freezes the image of a terrain that will become a timeless arena for both a public and a private confrontation.  
The desert and the water lend the formality of allegory to the story, much as similar settings do in _Knife in the Water_ and _Cui de Sac_.

As matrimonial investigator J. J. Gittes tails water and power board commissioner and suspected adulterer Hollis Mulwray, Polanski keeps the detective in perplexed close-up while framing Mulwray as a distant figure in a landscape, conducting some obscure investigation of his own in the parched land around the city and along the seashore. Here, after the two independent vigils have continued into the night, water abruptly gushes from a reservoir outlet pipe into the sea, and Polanski cuts to the first close-up of an anguished Mulwray. A wound has opened and Mulwray is shortly afterwards found dead. His ex-partner, Noah Cross, scheming for his own profit by draining the reservoir, later waxes lyrical on Mulwray’s love for water and its connection with the ‘origins of life’; in an earlier apostrophe to the dead man, he also sums up how one dream has supplanted another: ‘Hollis Mulwray made this city, and he made me a fortune’. When asked what else, with all his wealth, he could possibly want, Cross jovially replies: the future.

Within this parable of malevolent struggle for the fruits of the earth (John Huston’s craggy, expansive presence the embodiment of smiling villainy), the private detective is the helpless player. Cynically in his element in the murky world he inhabits, J. J. Gittes is also, in the terms of Towne’s conception (‘a very brash, cynical and also very naive character’) and Polanski’s treatment, ‘innocent’. Like Rosemary Woodhouse, he first makes his appearance dressed in white, and where the former character – through her later transformations into yellow, red and Madonna-and-motherhood blue – was perversely led to accept and embrace her Satanic enemy, Gittes is condemned to re-enact an obscure ritual as predetermined as the biblical motion of the political plot (this is the second time, after all, that Huston has played ‘Noah’, though the correspondence here would seem to be with Cain and Abel).

The other opaquely ‘innocent’ players in Gittes’ drama are first of all Hollis and then Evelyn Mulwray; and Polanski has them approach each other as remotely circling satellites, repeating the spatial effect of Gittes’ puzzled tracking of Mulwray through the desert with interior lighting and setting that emphasise the space and distance between characters. When the private eye and the inscrutable Mrs Mulwray finally reach the bed, Gittes recalls his past as a detective in Chinatown – a neighbourhood whose strangeness seeps as insidiously into his life as the desert into the insubstantial city. A legion of oriental domestics hover silently throughout – as undermining a presence as the two workmen, first heard scratching like mice in the wainscoting, whom Gittes discovers scraping Mulwray’s name from his door. The story Gittes tells is of a woman he once knew, whom he tried to help and whom he only helped more certainly to destroy. Mrs Mulwray’s question – ‘Dead?’ – goes unanswered until the final scene when her own getaway car, a white Packard, is stopped at the edge of Chinatown by a hail of police bullets, and Gittes’ past and present are closed out with an hallucinatory hint of _deja vu_ and an associate’s advice: ‘Forget it Jake, it’s Chinatown’.<br>
**Richard Combs, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, August 1974**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbOTY3NzU5NTQ2LDQ5NzgxODgxMF19
-->