<![endif]-->

I’m not a fan of all Woody Allen’s films, but I love this one. It’s my go-to comfort movie. Savour its joyous kaleidoscopic cornucopia of characters and its feast of 1940s popular music. For me, it resonates with my lifetime in showbiz, as well as my post-war provincial Jewish childhood. Stanley Kubrick said it was like watching a home movie.

Mike Leigh

_Radio Days_ could be seen as another version of _The Purple Rose of Cairo_, in which the creations of popular fiction not only light up humdrum lives but themselves take on a kind of humdrum reality, become part of the family.  
One could even see the new film as being the raw material out of which the earlier film had been developed: a sketchbook of (semi-) autobiography, Jewish family comedy and show-biz parody, all loosely related to the ambience of radio entertainment in the 30s and 40s, and out of which the movie-ambience joke, the Pirandellian whimsy, of _Purple Rose_ might have been distilled.  
The back-to-front chronology of this would certainly be in keeping with the backwards-developing logic of Woody Allen’s career, the way in which all his recent films seem to define themselves by refusing to define themselves in movie terms, unravelling the conventions of film comedy not in order to reinvent them but in order to preserve something essential about Allen’s own comedy and persona that he doesn’t quite trust to the safekeeping of the cinema.  
The ‘disappearing’ conceits of _Purple Rose_ and _Zelig_ are symptoms of a cinema that is itself always looking for a back exit, and might have found it in such a defiantly non-film, such a compendium of gags and period snapshots, as _Radio Days_.

It’s no surprise either that this backward development, this devolving non-film, should have brought Allen so close to his beginnings, to his evolving pre-film, _Take the Money and Run_. The main advance that _Radio Days_ has made over that novice work is its assurance that its halting, digressive formlessness doesn’t matter. The sign of Allen’s confidence as a filmmaker is a matter of voice, his own voice-over narration here, which supplies the continuity in this piecemeal account of Allen junior’s upbringing and makes the comedy seem richer than it is, implying as it does the mature obsessions and neuroses towards which all these fledgling instances of sexual insecurity, hero worship and love of show-biz kitsch are headed. In this, Allen may have come up with one of the most effective uses of narrated cinema since the heyday of Orson Welles, because so much of the film is invested in the persona of the narrator, implying a development which doesn’t have to be presented on screen.  
So many of the incidents in _Radio Days_ could have appeared in any order because there is no inherent progression, even of the conventional ‘coming of age’ variety in this film’s close cousin, _Brighton Beach Memoirs_.

Far from coming of age, Little Joe doesn’t change at all in the some six years covered by the film. And such narrative continuities as Aunt Bea’s hapless search for the right beau remain quite static, except where they serve – the trip to Radio City Music Hall, for instance – to flesh out the film’s real subject, the show-biz biography of Woody Allen. Emotional continuities, perhaps, count for more than narrative ones, with the ups and downs of family life described through the tunes and programmes associated with each member: the song that reminds Little Joe of his parents’ anniversary, which was the only time he saw them kiss; or the ‘heartache and problems’ programme he imagines them taking part in (‘I love him, but what did I do to deserve him?’, says his mother of his father). But even the emotional trajectory becomes a little shaky when so many of these sketches veer off into (rather limp) gags only tangentially related to the family – Mr Zipsky’s rampage through Rockaway centre with a meat cleaver, the outrage of the Communists’ daughter kissing a black man that sends Mrs Silverman rigid with shock.

In some cases, the radio programmes and personalities are allowed a life of their own within the film, their interest again lying mostly in the way they fill in Allen’s creative hinterland, suggesting how the corniest conventions of this pre-pubescent entertainment might have supplied the inspiration for some of his later films. The most neatly turned of these sequences, the Sports Legends account of pitcher Kirby Kyle, whose loss of limbs in no way diminished his ‘heart’, has the epigrammatic absurdity of _Zelig_. And the most extended, the rise to radio stardom of Mia Farrow’s cigarette girl, ending with the New Year’s party she hosts with such immortals as the Masked Avenger and Biff Baxter, is a good-natured ‘lives of the entertainers’ parody like _Broadway Danny Rose_.

These sequences also have a ‘finished’ quality that makes much of the surrounding material to do with the family look rather desultory and pointless – even such a potentially nice joke as Bea’s ardent date being frightened off by Orson Welles’ _War of the Worlds_ broadcast never really seems to arrive at its punch-line. It is perhaps no accident that Allen begins the film with one of his best – though most tangential – jokes, about the burglars who bring their victims an unexpected windfall. Nor that this depends on their guessing three tunes that neatly illustrate the musical range of the soundtrack accompaniment that follows – the Big Band sound of ‘Dancing in the Dark’, the jazzy ‘Chinatown, My Chinatown’, the folksy ‘Sailor’s Hornpipe’ – and that is itself one of the film’s best and most cohesive features.

Richard Combs, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, July 1987
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTgzNTU4MzA1OV19
-->