
<![endif]-->

_+ pre-recorded intro by Professor Ginette Vincendeau, King’s College London (Wed 30 June only)_

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

With 1,475,391 tickets sold in France, _Le Doulos_ was Jean-Pierre Melville’s second major box office success after _Léon Morin, prêtre_. The clever plot was a major attraction (publicity urged people not to miss the beginning), as were the performances of Belmondo, the top young male star of the time, and Reggiani, who was (rightly) hailed as an actor who had been scandalously ignored by filmmakers since _Casque d’or_ (1952). Le Doulos was widely reviewed by the daily and weekly press, where it received flattering comparisons with the three ‘gold standards’ of _Touchez pas au grisbi_, _Le Trou_ and _Du rififi chez les hommes_. In the cinephile press, Claude Beylie, a Melville fan, wrote an elogious review in _Cahiers du cinéma_, stressing the film’s ‘moral reflexion’ on truth and lies and ‘extraordinary craftsman’s precision, a high love of style’. References to masterly technique, sobriety, elliptical style and narrative efficiency graced almost every review, summed up by _L’Express_ as ‘quasi perfection of _Le Doulos’_. An isolated critical note by _Les Nouvelles littéraires_ – ‘All we see here is a lot of professionalism and a clever use of two remarkable actors, Belmondo and Reggiani’ – is worth quoting because the ‘all technique and no content’ slur will become a leitmotiv of hostile Melville criticism right up till the 1990s. Since 1963, _Le Doulos_ has steadily risen to the status of an uncontested ‘classic’. It was one of the ‘100 films’ included in a special issue of _Cahiers du cinéma_.

Many reviewers in 1963 praised Melville for reaching out to both popular and cinephile audiences. A few lamented the ‘vulgar’ genre, although on the whole conceding that Melville had ‘transcended’ the thriller. Inevitably, references to the ‘American-ness’ of the film abounded, evidenced by its classicism, and in particular its ‘efficiency’ and ‘sobriety’, as well as its noir thematics and visuals. At the same time most reviewers noted that the essential ambiguity and ‘tragic’ mood of _Le Doulos_ endowed it with a strong French and Melvillian streak.

The aspect of _Le Doulos_ which has attracted most critical attention is its spectacular narrative twist. Until nearly 90 minutes into the movie, we believe Silien is a nark. His phone call to Salignari (Daniel Crohem), his assault on Thérèse, his appropriation of the jewels, his elaborate _mise en scène_ of Nuttheccio and Armand’s deaths, all conspire to make the spectator, like Faugel, believe Silien has set him up. When he reveals that Thérèse, not he, was the informer, we are stunned into rereading everything that has gone before. Despite Melville’s assertion that he ‘gave a double twist to the situations in the novel’, _Le_ _Doulos_’ structure of deception comes from the book. Although occasionally Lesou gives us access to Faugel’s inferiority (in Gilbert’s scene, in the botched heist in Neuilly, when Faugel wakes up to ponder at length what has happened to him), in all other respects Lesou’s reader, like Melville’s viewer, is led up the garden path for most of the story. Lesou’s Silien is ‘a guy who does not exteriorise himself’, so that his motivations are always opaque. Clearly the cleverness of Lesou’s plotting must have attracted Melville.

As announced by the post-credit quote (‘One must choose. To die… or to lie?’), each character in _Le Doulos_ in turn lies (or may be lying) to someone at some point – Gilbert about Arlette, Faugel about Gilbert, Silien about Faugel, Thérèse about Silien, Clain about the drug squad’s threat to Silien, etc. In the trailer, _Le Doulos_ is described as both ‘A tragedy of lies’ and ‘Pure mystery’. Even Silien’s series of revelations is open to question. As many, including Melville have pointed out, there is no guarantee that he is telling the truth. He is backed up by Jean, but they could be lying together. Melville edits Silien’s revelations over dreamy piano music, giving them a distinctly oneiric quality. We also see how skillfully Silien manipulates Fabienne to believe that she ‘heard’ a gunshot while waiting in the car outside Gilbert’s house.

This web of deception means that _Le Doulos_ is constantly negotiating issues of truth and lies, appearances and reality – both moral and cinematic. For Zimmer and de Bechade, _Le Doulos_ shows that ‘the world is but one immense duperie, where everyone cheats and steals’, while for Bantcheva it ‘demonstrates the impossibility of trusting representations of time, space and causality’. For her _Le Doulos_ questions the very essence of classical film narration, and ‘the greatest liar is without doubt the filmmaker who leads us from one falsehood to another.’ From a different perspective, Murray Smith argues that ‘the duration and intensity of our aversion towards Silien precludes a simple cognitive revision of our understanding of events and of our moral allegiances. The ‘drags of emotions may make us resist the revision, prompting us to question the reliability of the narration.’

While the opening credits and first sequence of _Le Doulos_ distil urban alienation and construct the abstract noir space in which the story unfolds, the ending sums up the absurdity of a tragedy which engulfs characters who lie and die, contradicting the opening quote with its existential choice. The Chinese screen collapses as in the catastrophic ending of _Les Enfants terribles_. The mirror reflects the ultimate narcissistic vanity of the fatally wounded hoodlum.

In a more conventional film one could see in this ending a classic ‘crime does not pay’ message. Silien’s palatial new home, paid for with ill-gotten gains, will not be lived in. But this would be to ascribe to the film a moral framework which is alien to it. The incursion into nouveau riche suburbia, which rhymes with and yet points to the difference from Gilbert’s seedy abode at the beginning, hints at a critique of 1960s embourgeoisement or at least a deliberate departure from it. The reference to _The Asphalt Jungle_ points in this direction. Where Sterling Hayden’s horse symbolised the dream of a return to rural nostalgia, Belmondo’s is a status symbol.

Out of an excellent thriller, Melville fashioned a tragic noir tale, stripped of its sociological depth and conventional moral viewpoint, yet resonant with cinematic art in its purest form. As Bernard Dort put it in _France-Observateur_: ‘It is less the crime plot which kept me on the edge of my seat than the pleasure Melville takes in making cinema.’<br>
**Ginette Vincendeau, _Jean-Pierre Melville ‘An American in Paris’_ (BFI Publishing, 2003)**<br><br>
<![endif]-->

**Le Doulos**

_Director:_ Jean-Pierre Melville

_Production Companies:_ Rome-Paris Films, Paris, Compagnia Cinematografica Champion

_Presented by:_ Carlo Ponti,

Georges de Beauregard

_Production Manager:_ Georges de Beauregard

_Unit Managers:_ Jean Pieuchot, Roger Scipion

_Production Secretary:_ Liliane Delerme *

_Associate Director:_ Charles L. Bitsch

_1st Assistant Director:_ Volker Schlöndorff

_Script Girl:_ Elisabeth Rappeneau

_Adaptation:_ Jean-Pierre Melville

_From the novel by:_ Pierre Lesou

_Director of Photography:_ Nicolas Hayer

_Camera Operator:_ Henri Tiquet

_Assistant Camera:_ André Dubreuil,

Etienne Rosenfeld

_Key Grip:_ Jean Boudaloux

_Chief Electrician:_ Etienne Duteil

_Stills Photography:_ Raymond Voinquel

_Editor:_ Monique Bonnot

_Assistant Editor:_ Michèle Boëhm

_Art Director:_ Daniel Guéret

_Assistant Art Director:_ Donald Cardwell

_Set Decorator:_ Pierre Charron

_Props:_ André Davalan *

_Costumer:_ Paulette Breil

_Music:_ Paul Misraki

_Piano-bar:_ Jacques Loussier

_Orchestra Conductor:_ Jacques Météhen

_Sound:_ Julien Coutelier

_Sound Assistants:_ Victor Revelli, Jean Gaudelet

_Publicity:_ Bertrand Tavernier

_Cast:_

Jean-Paul Belmondo _(Silien)_

Serge Reggiani _(Maurice Faugel)_

Jean Desailly _(Inspector Clain)_

René Lefèvre _(Gilbert Varnove)_

Marcel Cuvelier _(detective 1)_

Aimé de March _(Jean)_

Fabienne Dali _(Fabienne)_

Monique Hennessy _(Thérèse Dalmain)_

Carl Studer _(Kern)_

Christian Lude _(the doctor)_

Jacques de Léon _(Armand)_

Jack Léonard _(detective 2)_

Paulette Breil _(Anita)_

Philippe Nahon _(Rémy)_

Charles Bayard _(old man)_

Daniel Crohem _(Inspector Salignari)_

Charles Bouillaud _(bartender)_

Michel Piccoli _(Nuttheccio)_

Georges Sellier _(bartender)_ *

Andrès _(maître d’hotel)_ *

Volker Schlöndorff _(man entering bar)_ *

France 1963

109 mins

* Uncredited <br><br>
<![endif]-->

BIG SCREEN CLASSICS

**Le Doulos** + pre-recorded intro by Professor Ginette Vincendeau, King’s College London

Mon 7 Jun 14:15; Thu 17 Jun 20:45; Wed 30 Jun 17:45

**The Last Picture Show (Director’s Cut)**

7 Jun 17:45

**The Killers** + pre-recorded intro by Imogen Sara Smith, author of ‘In Lonely Places: Film Noir beyond the City’

Tue 8 Jun 14:30; Wed 23 Jun 17:50

**The Night of the Hunter**

Tue 8 Jun 20:50; Wed 16 Jun 18:15 (+ pre-recorded intro by Geoff Andrew, Programmer-at-Large)

**The Tango Lesson**

Wed 9 Jun 17:50 (+ pre-recorded intro by So Mayer, author of ‘The Cinema of Sally Potter’)

**Cleo from 5 to 7** **Cléo de 5 à 7**

Thu 10 Jun 21:00; Mon 21 Jun 14:30

**Man Hunt**

Sat 12 Jun 16:00; Tue 29 Jun 14:15

**Sweet Smell of Success**

Sun 13 Jun 15:45; Sat 26 Jun 11:40

**Eraserhead**

Mon 14 Jun 21:00; Thu 24 Jun 21:10

**L’eclisse (The Eclipse)**

Tue 15 Jun 17:50

**La Haine**

Wed 16 Jun 21:00; Fri 18 Jun 20:40

**Bitter Victory**

Sun 20 Jun 13:00; Mon 28 Jun 17:55

**Touch of Evil**

Sun 20 Jun 18:15

**Citizen Kane**

Mon 21 Jun 20:45

**Steamboat Bill, Jr.**

Tue 22 Jun 18:30

**The Big City (Mahanagar)**

Wed 23 Jun 17:40

**The Gospel According to Matthew (Il vangelo secondo Matteo)**

Thu 24 Jun 17:40

**Alice in the Cities (Alice in den Städten)**

Fri 25 Jun 20:45

**The White Ribbon (Das weisse Band)**

Sat 26 Jun 16:30

**The Man Who Wasn’t There**

Sun 27 Jun 18:20

**Persona**

Mon 28 Jun 21:00
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMzM2NjU5ODMzXX0=
-->