
_Lilting_ – the debut feature by Cambodian-born, UK-based Hong Khaou – is a tender, low-key examination of grief, fractured communication and the inherent emotional danger of building one’s whole life around a single person.

It stars Ben Whishaw as Richard, a young man reeling from the recent death of his boyfriend, Kai (Andrew Leung). In a haze of grief, Richard visits Kai’s mother Junn (famed Chinese actress Cheng Pei Pei) at the drab retirement home where she was guiltily secreted by her son shortly before his death. Richard is met with a frosty reception; the isolated, non-English speaker Junn was heavily dependent on Kai for company and support, and is resentful of Richard for hogging her only son’s precious time. She is, however, apparently oblivious to the fact that Richard and Kai were an item. Borne of a desire to keep Kai’s memory alive through Junn and achieve a personal sense of closure, Richard resolves to forge a relationship with the resentful lady, and spots his opportunity when he discovers that she is dating an old English gent (Peter Bowles, amusingly dry). Ostensibly to oil the wheels of the elderly lovebirds’ relationship, Richard employs a friendly young British-Chinese woman named Vann (the lively, likeable Naomi Christie) to act as an interpreter.  

The ensuing narrative quietly makes hay from intricately exploiting the tense, cavernous spaces that emerge between what’s verbalised and what isn’t (how long, for example, can poor Richard keep his and Kai’s secret?) and between what’s intended and understood: thanks to the delicate, multilingual set-up, almost every exchange carries an unpredictable dramatic charge.

_Lilting_, the latest offering from Film London and BBC Films’ Microwave scheme for low-budget independent cinema (its budget: £120,000), began life as a play. Though it’s not difficult to imagine it being staged successfully, the material translates well to film, and even suits its low budget. The small cast and limited range of locations add to the overall aura of intimacy, while Khaou makes excellent use of cinema-specific techniques. He frequently employs searching close-ups and tight framing to accentuate characters’ isolation, highlighting the importance of their gestures and facial expressions. There are, for example, a number of finely wrought close-ups of Cheng, who gives a subtle, still performance of bruised stoicism, with flashes of irrepressible irritation. Junn’s backstory – she is a disillusioned Cambodian-Chinese immigrant unwilling and unable to acclimatise to new surroundings – constitutes one of the film’s most quietly moving threads.

Lilting also benefits from intelligent use of elliptical transitions, which often collapse temporal states without the need for an edit. Khaou’s biggest formal gamble is to periodically and unexpectedly insert disorienting sequences of Kai interacting with either Richard or Junn; his scenes with Richard take the form of intimate flashbacks, while those with Junn have a more hallucinatory quality, made notable by Ula Pontikos’s slightly impressionistic cinematography. It’s a smart use of form to keenly evoke that strange, hard-to-communicate time in the aftermath of a bereavement, when the departed person remains a palpable presence despite their corporeal absence. One long take set in a greasy-spoon café morphs imperceptibly from a business-like discussion between Richard and Vann to another, more personal chat between Richard and Kai. Gradually it dawns on us why Richard has chosen to take Vann to this particular café: because memories of his relationship are rooted there.

Intriguingly, in play form, _Lilting_ didn’t feature a gay theme: the Richard character was the widower of a suddenly deceased woman. However, Khaou – who for a number of years worked as head of home entertainment at specialist UK LGBT distributor Peccadillo Pictures – made the change to add a further layer of dramatic intrigue. It works beautifully, and carries an added resonance given recent developments in the trajectory of LGBT cinema. In a recent article for the _Guardian_, the critic Ben Walters convincingly situated _Lilting_ in a current trend of ‘backward-looking’ LGBT cinema that has emerged in a time of ‘apparent legal equality, with less demand for big-screen expressions of cathartic angst or romantic wish-fulfilment’. This trend, continued Walters, includes ‘small-scale, naturalistic, bittersweet’ works characterised by ‘present-mindedness and a willingness to explore grief, so often deferred through the years of struggle’.

In this respect, Khaou’s f’lm resembles Xavier Dolan’s _Tom at the Farm_ (2013), in which a closeted copywriter appears at the house of his late boyfriend’s mother, who was oblivious to her son’s sexuality. Instead of the roiling erotic tension and Chabrol-esque intrigue of the young Canadian’s film, however, _Lilting_ is a quieter, more reflective affair. Its gentle approach more keenly recalls Neil Hunter and Tom Hunsinger’s sorely underrated, Essex-set _Lawless Heart_ (2001), itself a character-led drama set directly in the aftermath of the death of a gay man’s partner. _Lilting_ also puts me strongly in mind of Michael Winterbottom’s Chekhov-inspired masterpiece _Wonderland_ (1999), with which it shares not an LGBT theme but a quiet naturalism and a strong sense of London – frequently depicted on film as a bustling metropolis – as a lonely, chilly place. Like _Wonderland_, _Lilting_ largely excises London ‘landmark’ imagery from the frame. Instead, there are mere flashes of city iconography – a reflection of a red bus here, a rushing train there – all of which evoke a thematically apposite sense of transience and impermanence.

Though in most respects a remarkably confident and composed first feature, _Lilting_ is not without its flaws. Leung gives a spirited turn in his limited screen time, but he is not (yet) in the same class as Whishaw, and the imbalance in the quality of their acting – particularly in crucial, intimate scenes – can be striking. I was also a little sceptical about Khaou’s decision to withhold the exact circumstances of Kai’s death until such a late juncture in the story – the film has enough authentic, character-rooted drama for this lie of omission to come across as an unnecessarily manipulative leveraging of suspense.

The final word should be reserved for Whishaw, who gives an extraordinarily moving performance as the grieving man. The first time I saw him in action was nine years ago, when he played the small but memorable role of put-upon PA Pingu in _Nathan Barley_, Chris Morris and Charlie Brooker’s scathing satire of clueless Shoreditch media types. _Barley_ was a show of outsize comic performances and baroque cruelty – poor Pingu is electrocuted by his hipster-monster boss – but, amid all the madness, Whishaw communicated a bruised, tragic sadness that would have tonally unbalanced the show had he been on screen for any great length of time. With his limpid eyes, gentle voice and rangy yet fragile physicality, Whishaw brings the same heartbreaking qualities to _Lilting_, and he’s in almost every scene. His embodiment of grief is utterly convincing, and he gives an unselfish performance, vacillating fluidly between compassion, petulance and tenacity, all the while seeming so vulnerable that he could shatter into a million pieces at any moment. One lump-in-the-throat reaction shot of Richard, coming after Junn unexpectedly compliments his technique of using chopsticks to fry bacon – a technique obviously taught to him by Kai – might be the most quietly devastating piece of acting I’ve seen all year.<br>
**Ashley Clark, _Sight & Sound_, September 2014**

**Taarof: A Verbal Dance**<br>
_Taarof: A Verbal Dance_ tells the story of Nazanin, a young Iranian woman who was born and raised in England. The film opens on the funeral of her estranged father whom we soon realise she lost touch with prior to his death. Not only does she have to face the death of a loved one she lost touch with but she also has to face an army of estranged relatives and a culture that she once knew very well.

_Taarof_ tells the story of loss, of being an outsider even within your own culture, of finding one's own identity and of living one's truth. It aims to show that there is no correct way to grieve, no matter what cultural expectations we may have put on us by those around us.<br>
**taarofshortfilm.com**

**Taarof: A Verbal Dance**
_Writer and Director:_ Alannah Olivia
_Executive Producer/Co-creator:_
Roxy Faridany
_Executive Producer/Head of Hair and Make-up:_ Lizzie Georgiu
_Producer:_ Melinda Kaur
_Casting:_ Emma Compton
_Story Editor:_ Kathleen Beedles
_Cinematography:_ Jaime Ackroyd
_Editor/Co-producer:_ Emma McCleave
_Production Design:_ Graham Robinson
_Art Direction:_ Katerina Michail
_Sound Recordist:_ David Bekkevold
_Boom Operator:_ Maciej Londo

**Cast**<br>
Roxy Faridany _(Nazanin)_
Souad Faress _(Alborz)_
Fatima Adoum _(Shirin)_
Fisun Burgess _(Shadi)_
Nalân Burgess _(Banu)_
Glnaz Maleki _(Elaheh)_
Dae Dash _(Omid)_
Ishpriya Bird _(young Nazanin)_
Lara Alpay _(young Banu)_
Arash Nouri _(prayer man)_

UK 2018<br>
17 mins<br>

**LILTING**
_Directed by:_ Hong Khaou
_Production Companies:_ Lilting Productions, Microwave
_Presented by:_ Film London
_In Association with:_ BBC Films, Stink,Sums Film & Media
_With Funding from:_ The National Lottery, BFI
_Produced by_: Dominic Buchanan
_For Film London:_
_Head of Production and Talent Development:_ Maggie Ellis
_Creative Producer (Microwave):_ Mia Bays
_Business and Finance Producer (Microwave):_ Mike Kelly
_Development and Production Officer:_ Tessa Inkelaar

_Talent Development Manager:_ Kevin Dolan

_Stills Photographer:_ James Dewar

_For BBC Films:_

_Executive Producer:_ Steve Jenkins

_Marketing Executive:_ Jacqui Barr

_For Stink:_

_Executive Producers:_ Robert Herman,

Daniel Bergmann

_For Sums:_

_Executive Producers:_ Andy Brunskill,

Robert Benton, Simon Flamenk

_Line Producer:_ Donna Mabey

_Production Manager_: Hazel Falck

_Production Accountant:_ Lynne Samuelson

_Location Managers:_ Lex Donovan,

Ross Monaghan

_Location Scouts:_ Owen Twort, Lorna Ford,

Andy Ross

_Picture Post Production by:_ LipSync Post

_Post Producer:_ Aileen McIntosh

_Production Assistant:_ Pascal Le Comte

_Runners:_ Hayleigh Roberts, Ryan Delahunty

_1st Assistant Director_: Jon Midlane

_2nd Assistant Director:_ Emlyn Pool

_3rd Assistant Director:_ Jeannette Sutton

_Script Supervisor:_ Zara Carnagie

_Casting Director:_ Kharmel Cochrane

_Written by_: Hong Khaou

_Director of Photography_: Ula Pontikos

_Gaffer:_ Bernie Rostoski

_Best Boy:_ Paul Starkey

_Grips:_ Frederico Lopez, Tom Pittman

_Lighting Technicians:_ John Harris,

Salvador Gomez-Lopez

_Focus Puller:_ Karl Hui

_D.I.T.:_ James Ian Gray

_Clapper Loader:_ Anca Badita

_Camera Trainee:_ Jonathan Tomlin

_Stills Photographer_: Stuart Hendry

_Editor_: Mark Towns

_Assistant Editor:_ Philip Michael

_Production Design_: Miren Maranon

_Art Director:_ Augusta Akerman

_Art Department:_ Francesca Massariol,

Freddy dos Santos, Evannia Paine

_Set Dresser_: Emily Jayne Armitage

_Construction Manager:_ Michael Mulligan

_Prop Buyer:_ Jerry Bland

_Property Master:_ Nikola Wake

_Painter:_ Ben Reynolds

_Illustrator:_ Irene Fuga

_Title Design:_ Christian Morhring,

Frauke Stegmann

_Costume Designer:_ Camille Benda

_Costume Supervisor:_ Laura Venables

_Costume Standby:_ Frances Scott

_Make-up and Hair Designer:_ Annette Field

_Make-up and Hair Artist:_ Katie Lee

_Head of DI:_ James Clarke

_Senior Online Editor:_ Connan McStay

_Colourists:_ Scott Goulding, Lee Clappison

_Music Composed by_: Stuart Earl

_Music Supervision:_ Connie Farr,

Thinksync Music

_Dance Choreographer:_ Raymond Chai

_Sound Recordist:_ Pete Cowasji

_Boom Operator:_ David Turnbull

_Supervising Sound Editor:_ Anna Bertmark

_Executive Sound Editor_: Joakim Sundström

_Sound Re-Recording Mixer:_ Howard Bargroff

_Assistant Sound Re-Recording Mixer:_

Matt Johns

_Foley Artist:_ Ulf Olausson

_Foley Recordist:_ Lotta Nilsson

_Acting Coach:_ Giles Foreman

_Mandarin Translator:_ Lillian Chia

_Pinyin Translator:_ Jon Oiartzun

_Film London Microwave Mentors:_

_Producer Mentor:_ Ken Marshall

_Writer Mentor:_ Peter Ettedgui

_Director Mentor:_ Clio Barnard

_Cast:_

Ben Whishaw _(Richard)_

Cheng Pei Pei _(Junn)_

Andrew Leung _(Kai)_

Morven Christie _(Margaret)_

Naomi Christie _(Vann)_

Peter Bowles _(Alan)_

UK 2013

86 mins

T A P E was founded in 2015 as a response to the lack of representation on screen. Find out more about this curatorial collective at **tapecollective.co.uk**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTgzNzczNDk2OF19
-->