
<![endif]-->

_+ pre-recorded introduction by film critic Christina Newland_

_Un flic_ opens with a quote from François-Eugène Vidocq (1775-1857), an escaped convict who became Chief of Police and published his memoirs in 1828. An inspiration for Balzac’s Vautrin and a great influence on the French _policier_, Vidocq remains emblematic of the porous border between crime and the law. The quote, ‘The only feelings man could ever inspire in the policeman are ambiguity and derision’, thus strikes a keynote: _Un flic_ will be a meditation on ambiguity (legal, moral or sexual) and derision. This is the meaning of the parallel editing in the opening sequence: four gangsters dressed like bank managers rob a bank, while Alain Delon, the gangster of _Le Samouraï_ and  
_Le Cercle rouge_ now plays Edouard Coleman, a police inspector who maintains highly ambivalent ties with the chief villain, Simon.

Although _Un flic_ did not achieve the stratospheric results of _Le Cercle rouge_, its box office takings (2.8 million tickets) were excellent, higher than those of  
_Le Samouraï_ for instance (even more impressive given that in the intervening five years, overall French box-office had dropped by about 30 million cinema-goers a year). Yet the reputation of Melville’s last film is that of a failure, on account of the severe thrashing it received from the French press. Review after review talked of boredom, emptiness, excessive mannerism and incoherence – Louis Chauvet in _Le Figaro_ even reproduced the press book’s summary as evidence that the film was incomprehensible.

There were too many improbabilities: among others, the fact that Coleman warns Simon without arresting him straight away, that he shuts the door on Paul’s suicide rather than preventing it, and that, as a Parisian _flic_, he drives a huge American car and works in hyper-modernist offices. The use of models for the train and helicopter was singled out as particularly unacceptable. Melville’s impeccable technique was recognised in two sequences, namely the opening bank robbery and the train heist, but the overwhelming feeling was that this was simply not enough. Robert Chazal in _France-Soir_ spoke of ‘gratuitous virtuosity’ and _Le Canard enchaîné_ compared Melville to ‘those who speak brilliantly to say nothing’. Most damagingly, Melville’s staunch fans, Baroncelli, Chapier and Beylie now turned against him – as summed up by Baroncelli: ‘One would like to write that _Un flic_ is the quintessence of Melvillian cinema. Unfortunately it is only its caricature,’ while Chapier thought the whole thing was ‘infinitely embarrassing for those who always loved him.’

There were some small pockets of praise, for the heist sequences, and for the performances, although many thought Delon was miscast. But even the most positive responses, such as by Albert Cervoni in _France nouvelle_ were lukewarm. Cervoni talked of Melville having ‘once more, made a very good film, but the same very good film’. And Jean Rochereau in _La Croix_ issued ‘a gentle warning.’ Only Claude Mauriac in _L’Express_ wrote a truly enthusiastic (and perceptive) review. But these were tiny islands in a tide of hostility and by all accounts Melville was extremely hurt by this devastating and sometimes abusive response (_Positif_ for instance demanded, ‘it is about time “Inspector” Melville was made redundant’).

Were the critics right? Melville’s last film is strange and, if not incoherent, certainly uneven, investing more in set-pieces than tight plotting. There is a problem with Delon, although not so much miscasting as the fact that his role is eclipsed by Simon, especially in the middle section of the film when he disappears for half an hour (Melville offered Delon either part but the star chose to play the _flic_ partly to break with his gangster image – a shrewd move in the long run, but clearly not at the time). Still, given, at the very least, two breathtaking sequences, why so much hatred?

In the ferocious and highly volatile French critical milieu of the time, Melville suffered a backlash after the triumph of _Le Cercle rouge_. But evidently the surfacing of the normally hidden sexual ambivalence of the ‘virile’ gangster was ‘too much’. _Un flic_ is both opaque and obvious in its portrayal of ‘homophilia’ and the critics’ responses at the time are an interesting mixture of denial (mostly) and abuse (sometimes). This coalesced round the figure of the transvestite, either ignored or referred to as ‘detestable’, a ‘dramatically useless and purely sensational detail’. Only Edmond Gilles in _L’Humanité_ noted, ‘not without ambiguity, [Coleman] plays with the passion that a transvestite has for him’. Similarly, the relationship between Coleman and Simon appeared as a caricature of Melville’s ‘virile friendships’, while Deneuve was a parody of the marginal Melvillian women.

There is undeniably truth in these views, even though they do not exhaust the meaning of the film. Claude Mauriac was one of the few who noted at the time: ‘A woman between two men? Rather two men opaquely facing each other and trying to reach each other through a transparent woman.’ In total contrast, Serge Daney, who in the late 1960s had vilified Melville, wrote in 1988 of how ‘beautiful’ _Un flic_ was, concluding: ‘Like all great filmmakers, [Melville] is content with filming what, that is to say, whom, he loves.’

In July 2002 Louis Skorecki wrote two brief but extravagant pieces in _Libération_ on the occasion of a television broadcast of the film. On  
8 July he called _Un flic_ ‘a subdued pastel-coloured masterpiece with gay overtones (not outrageously queeny, a real gay film: glorious, massive, amorous). We love you Melville.’ Three days later, on 11 July, he extolled Melville’s representation of ‘sublimely queer gangsters’ and harangued critics who ‘in a rush to praise his worst films (_Le Samouraï_), ignored his masterpieces and buried his most beautiful, his last, _Un flic_. While Skorecki somewhat overstates textual evidence, the discrepancy of these readings, beyond wildly different critical climates, is ample testimony to the textual ambivalence built into _Un flic_.

Ginette Vincendeau, _Jean-Pierre Melville ‘An American in Paris’_ (BFI, 2003)
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTIxNDEwMDA5MzcsNzMwOTk4MTE2XX0=
-->