
_+ pre-recorded Q&A with director Jamila Wignot_

_The multi-hyphenate dancer, choreographer, director Alvin Ailey gets the documentary treatment from director Jamila Wignot. Premiering at S.O.U.L Film Fest, the film chronicles Ailey’s rise while exploring the challenges he had to face performing in a segregated America._

Alvin Ailey was a trailblazing pioneer who found salvation through dance. _Ailey_ traces the full contours of this brilliant and enigmatic man whose search for the truth in movement resulted in enduring choreography that centres on the Black American experience with grace, strength, and unparalleled beauty. Told through Ailey’s own words and featuring evocative archival footage and interviews with those who intimately knew him, director Jamila Wignot weaves together a resonant biography of an elusive visionary.<br>

**Director’s Statement**<br>
Nothing prepares you for the experience of Ailey – the emotional, spiritual, aural, and visual overwhelm the senses. As a filmmaker, I am drawn to stories about artists like Alvin Ailey – innovators who tenaciously follow their own voice and in doing redefined their chosen forms. Ailey’s dances – celebrations of African American beauty and history – did more than move bodies; they opened minds. His dances were revolutionary social statements that staked a claim as powerful in his own time as in ours: Black life is central to the American story and deserves a central place in American art and on the world stage. A working class, gay, Black man, he rose to prominence in a society that made every effort to exclude him. He transformed the world of dance and made space for those of us on the margins – space for Black artists like Rennie Harris and me.

I am inspired by subjective documentary portraits like Tom Volf’s _Maria by Callas_ and Raoul Peck’s _I Am Not Your Negro_, and by the poetic cinematic approaches of films such as Barry Jenkins’ _Moonlight_ and Terrence Malick’s _Days of Heaven_. My aim was to blend these influences into a sensorial, poetic documentary portrait.<br>
**Jamila Wignot, Press Notes**<br>

**Jamila Wignot** is a documentary filmmaker based in New York. Her directing work includes two episodes of the Peabody, Emmy and NAACP award-winning series _The African-Americans: Many Rivers to Cross_ (PBS), hosted by Henry Louis Gates and chronicling the 500-year history of African Americans; _Town Hall_ (co-directed with Sierra Pettingill), a feature-length co-production with ITVS following Tea Party activists determined to unseat Barack Obama; and, for PBS’s American Experience series, the Peabody Award-winning _Triangle Fire_ and Emmy-nominated _Walt Whitman_. Jamila’s producing credits include W. Kamau Bell’s _Bring the Pain_ (A&E); Sundance award-winning director Musa Syeed’s narrative feature _A Stray_ (SXSW); _Street Fighting Men_, following the Black Detroiters fighting for the city they love; and _The Rehnquist Revolution_, the fourth episode of WNET’s series _The Supreme Court_, which was an IDA Best Limited Series winner.<br>

**Our Bodies Back**<br>
_Our Bodies Back_ stages the work of acclaimed American poet and performance artist Jessica Care Moore in a breathtaking new dance film from Breakin’ Convention Artistic Director and Sadler’s Wells Associate Artist  Jonzi D.<br>



**AILEY**
_Director:_ Jamila Wignot
_Executive Producers:_ Stephen Ives, Amanda Pollak, Michael Kantor, Emily Blavatnik, Judy Kinberg, Sally Jo Fifer, Tony Hsiegh, Roberto Grande, Mimi Pham, Bryn Mooser, Kathryn Everett, Jenny Raskim, Geralyn White Dreyfous, Regina K. Scully
_Producer:_ Lauren DeFilippo
_Associate Producer:_ Matt Gottesfeld
_Production Associates:_ Bernard Ellouk, Amanda Lalezarian, Lillie Fleshler
_Archival Producer:_ Rebecca Kent
_Director of Photography:_ Naiti Gámez
_Editor:_ Annukka Lilja
_Assistant Editor/Post Production Supervisor:_ William Bentley
_Additional Assistant Editors:_ Cory Smith,  
Ally Southwood-Smith
_Graphics:_ John Vondracek, String Theory Ny
_Composer:_ Daniel Bernard Roumain
_Additional Original Score:_ Sultana Isham,  Minna Choi, Darrin Ross
_Researcher:_ Saoirse Hahn

**With**
Robert Battle
Rennie Harris
Darrin Ross
Don Martin
Mary Barnett
Linda Kent
George Faison
Judith Jamison
Bill Hammond
Sylvia Waters
Hope Clark
Sarita Allen
Masazumi Chaya
Bill T. Jones

USA 2021
82 mins

**Our Bodies Back**

_Director:_ Jonzi D.

UK 2020

5 mins
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMjAwMjg5MzIyOV19
-->