<![endif]-->

‘Somewhere there’s another land, different from this world below… We shall never find that lovely land of might have been…’ So goes one of the Ivor Novello songs that make up the soundtrack, and the on-screen musical entertainment, of Robert Altman’s _Gosford Park_ (2001). The same vision emerges, turned in a more explicitly religious direction by a country-and-western rendering, in Altman’s last film _A Prairie Home Companion_ (2006). There’s the two surviving Johnson Girls, Yolanda (Meryl Streep) and Rhonda (Lily Tomlin), remembering their family in song, ‘and I know there’s peace in the land of delight’, then a finale from the whole company of ‘In the Sweet By and By’, which evokes ‘a land that is fairer than this.’

Would Altman have found something appropriate, even comforting, in such a religious turn if he knew or suspected that this would be his last film? Possibly, although of course he’s been here before, 30 years ago, in country-and-western terms, and there’s nothing in this particular religious scheme that could be called personal. Altman was a Catholic by background, which has emerged most clearly in his urge to blaspheme (the Last Supper in _MASH_, 1969). In other films, he has chosen, if not exactly to worship elsewhere, then to use another place of worship as a community focus, a fixed architectural point in this land, perhaps pointing to that other.

The Presbyterian church bulks large in _A Prairie Home Companion_, literally; it’s one of only three buildings seen in this film, shot ‘entirely on location in St Paul, Minnesota’. Then there’s the Southern Presbyterian church where the Easter pageant is staged in _Cookie’s Fortune_ (1998), leading back to the town of Presbyterian Church, fragile frontier outpost in _McCabe & Mrs. Miller_ (1971), in which said edifice is so prominent. And what denomination is its equally prominent counterpart in _Popeye_ (1980)?

These churches’ significance, of course, is that they stand at the border of a region with no denomination at all. Death – whatever Altman suspected – permeates _A Prairie Home Companion_, which is also one of his most joyful films and one of the purest demonstrations of his narrative (or what is often assumed to be his anti-narrative) method. A bronze head of F. Scott Fitzgerald – St Paul’s most famous son presides in a glass booth at the top of the Fitzgerald Theatre, over what is a strange mixture of backstage musical, _film noir_ parody and personal testament. This is a fictional re-enactment of the last broadcast of _A Prairie Home Companion_, a long-running live radio show written and presented by local humorist Garrison Keillor.

So there’s death above, and death somehow worked into the design – in the beautiful execution of all the on-stage numbers, which exist in pools of light within an unusually deep and extensive area of darkness. And if death weren’t so much part of the fabric, then it’s unlikely the film could carry off its most difficult, theoretically unworkable and potentially ridiculous conceit. Which is to have the Angel of Death herself (Virginia Madsen) prowling backstage, circling the company, moving in on one of their number (L.Q. Jones), then after the show is over gliding into Mickey’s Diner, where she gives pause to the four principals who have been waxing hopeful about making their comeback.

Perhaps it helps that this is Death conceived in parodic terms, introduced through the narration of one Guy Noir (Kevin Kline), a private-eye who has taken charge of security at the Fitzgerald since falling on hard times (due to a lack of ‘missing heiresses and dead tycoons’). Death first comes to him as a vision in a white trenchcoat – ‘so white that rain would be embarrassed to fall on it’ – and he directs her to the Presbyterian church. But she returns to the Fitzgerald – ‘Presbyterians weren’t who you were looking for?’ – as if the theatre were church enough.

The doubleness of performance already suggests some alternative ‘land of might have been’, while theatrical realities conversely might put one in touch with eternal verities – ‘It was curtains, and everybody knew it,’ as Guy Noir pronounces, in best Sam Spade mode, talking about the imminent arrival from Texas of an executive known as ‘The Axeman’ Cruett (Tommy Lee Jones), representative of the corporation that now owns the Fitzgerald and intends to tear it down to make way for a parking lot. But having a good relationship with Death, hardboiled dame that she is, Guy Noir enlists her help, and before the night is out Cruett will also be sped on his way to ‘another land’. Not that his end will avert the end of the Fitzgerald.

But parody (and visual gags involving light bulbs/haloes) aside, this Death does have her sting, a lyrical, longing one. By the time the cast have reached their ensemble performance of ‘Red River Valley’ it’s possible to imagine New Hollywood Altman merging with the shade of Old Hollywood John Ford.  
In strictly Altmanesque terms, though, one might wonder at the role of these security guards – Guy Noir, the Fred Ward character in _The Player_ (1992) – which is peripheral-seeming but still pressingly central, as they patrol the precincts of fantasy, keeping the players’ noses clean.

Whether or not it’s the entry to a ‘land of delight’, death is an inevitable and unavoidable kind of altered state. And while it’s not exactly an uncommon occurrence in cinema as a whole, it has certain striking and peculiar functions in Altman. For one thing, it’s an altered state that is often welcomed through suicide. ‘Suicide is painless,’ declares the title song of _MASH_, which later forms the basis for the Last Supper interlude. The suicide of Cookie (Patricia Neal) in _Cookie’s Fortune_ convulses her family, and Lola (Lindsay Lohan), Yolanda’s disaffected teen daughter in _A Prairie Home Companion_, writes poetically about doing it to yourself with a car exhaust and hose pipe: ‘Death is easy, like jumping in the big blue air and waving hello to God’ or ‘Don’t expect to wake up and get toast for breakfast/The toast is you.’ ‘Suicide is painless’ isn’t in it.

Richard Combs, _Sight & Sound_, February 2007**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE0NTUzNzY2NjRdfQ==
-->