

**SPOILER WARNING  The following notes give away some of the plot.**

_HealtH_ is the last film that Robert Altman made under his contract with 20th Century-Fox, ending a run of films between 1977 and 1980 that certainly made him one of the most employed directors of the period. But it marked that end in almost total silence, since Fox were so unhappy with the film (reportedly because of disastrous sneak previews) that they allowed it to be shown no more than was necessary to fulfil their contractual obligations, and have since shelved it indefinitely. After such an ending, not even a whimper in commercial terms, one would not have been surprised if Altman had entered on a comparable period of unemployment, at least as far as the major studios were concerned. But, fortuitously, he then found himself at the helm of _Popeye_,  co-financed by Paramount and Walt Disney, and certain to be one of his biggest  box-office successes.

This sequence of events is not so much ironic as just plain confusing. In the Altman canon, _HealtH_ is another of those intricately populated frescoes (_Nashville_, _A Wedding_), in which the sociable gifts of an amiable host and the suspicious instincts of a social satirist meet and neutralise each other in the bland Panavision spaces. They have, however, usually been his best card with both critics and public. The blockbusting _Popeye_, paradoxically, would have to stand on the other side of Altman, in the shadow with those more closely argued, leanly plotted and commercially dubious essays (_McCabe & Mrs. Miller_, _Quintet_) on the politics of community. This might seem a perverse alignment, given the comic-strip-fairy-tale-musical-comedy ingredients that make _Popeye_ the perfect children’s fantasy that grownups can enjoy too. But what is significant here is not Popeye himself, nor Olive Oyl nor Swee’pea, nor even the Thimble Theater characters whom Altman choreographs into his most delightfully scene-filling background yet. It is the town of Sweethaven itself, looking like the expressionist ghetto of _The Golem_, all crazy angles and impossible perspectives, yet not just clinging figuratively to the edge of this world but actually built on the side of a Maltese cliff, palpably inhabitable.

In its rawness and ramshackleness and yet solidity, it harks back to Presbyterian Church in _McCabe & Mrs. Miller_. Sweethaven, of course, is a limbo society rather than a pioneer one – and at another extreme, the anonymous city in _Quintet_ is a terminal one. But the Western connection is important to all three – in a way, is the real backbone of Altman’s most substantial films. To begin with, it is curious that he should have painstakingly built ‘real’ settings for three such fantasies, while _HealtH_, a contemporary subject for which nothing had to be built, seems to be taking place nowhere in particular. The setting is  St Petersburg, Florida, but this is just stated, never shown. The action is entirely confined to the hotel where a convention is taking place to elect a president for the national health food association. But compared to Altman’s specificity about the city in _Quintet_, the hotel remains a strangely undynamic space, its geography unclear, even its décor (including the clutter of health food products and brand names) as blankly utilised as in those compendium films about various characters in various hotel suites.

Altman’s one decorative flourish might be taken as a wry comment on this sense of enclosure and insulation. Occasionally punctuating events, a long shot of the hotel – the only time we are allowed outside it – reveals it to be, whether neon or sun-lit, a massively pink and fairy-tale structure. But the effect of the shot is somehow more forlorn than satirical. Partly this is because Altman’s intention is not to satirise the health food faddists themselves but, through them, the whole American political process.  That image therefore becomes the repository of both cultish eccentricity and national aspirations; it is Altman’s America, a strangely antediluvian-looking dream castle.  ‘We had such high hopes in the beginning,’ says the unashamedly opportunist hero at the end, about his failed attempt to re-woo his ex-wife, but with a clear and similar double meaning.

In the wistfulness of that remark and the quaintness of the pink elephant that houses the convention there also seems to be a suspicion that the inevitable fate of any society is a kind of entropy. The ‘communal’ ethos of so much of Altman’s filmmaking, and his hesitation about attaching any definite meaning to the result, suggest his fear that once the community has been achieved, defined, it is done for. He has commented that he favours neither the old-world patriarchy nor the hippie communality of _A Perfect Couple_: both are passé, they have outlived their usefulness. Finally, and in line with this, that distant prospect of the hotel is the only time that _HealtH_ holds still for long enough to throw up a conceptual image – the rest is a buzz of oddity that is still in the process of happening. The whole of _Popeye_, however, crystallised in the prospect of Sweethaven, is such an image.

To adapt an aphorism to Altman, the past – for which Sweethaven is a kind of surrogate – is not so much a foreign country as the one he would most like to believe in.  The present is a constricting threat, to which the best response is to keep one’s options as open as possible, settings and meanings as amorphous as possible. _HealtH_ pursues this policy even more aggressively than _Nashville_ or _A Wedding_. The two contestants for the presidency of ‘Health’ are Esther Brill (Lauren Bacall), the populist, platitude-spouting old trouper, and Isabella Garnell (Glenda Jackson), the severe intellectual who subsists on a diet of hot water and high-minded phraseology. Gloria Burbank (Carol Burnett) attends as a special adviser on health to the White House, while her ex-husband, Harry Wolff (James Garner), is, by coincidence, one of Esther’s campaign managers.  ‘Dirty tricks’ are the province of Bobby Hammer (Henry Gibson), who eventually cooks up a scandal about Isabella having had a sex-change operation, and behind him is the irascible ‘fixer’ Colonel Cody (Donald Moffat), representing the conspiracy theory  of politics.

In addition, there is a galaxy of human scene-setting: chorines dressed as tomatoes and security men armed with walkie-talkies and armoured in corn-on-the-cob costumes. Real-life commentators drop in to commentate: Dick Cavett is host to a talk show being clumsily marshalled behind the opening credits, and while later touring the stands, he is ‘surprised’ to find Walter Cronkite among a gaggle of bystanders. At the end, Cavett hands over to Dinah Shore, who arrives to cover a hypnotists’ convention – just as the health conclave had been preceded by the manure lobby. The reality here is the broadcasters’ reality: conventions, like politics, are a way of life, what matters is the continuity, not what any particular event is putting on display.

In a way, the most important figure in _HealtH_ is its most mythical and mysterious character, wild-eyed Colonel Cody. He has not been lightly named – or rather, he has not lightly named himself, for in the film’s rather reductionist scheme, even his metaphorical threat is finally defused by the revelation that he is simply Esther’s crazy brother Lester. But what he brings to mind, of course, is the charlatanism of the ‘authentic’ Cody in _Buffalo Bill and the Indians_, and the charlatanism which for Altman always overtakes reality (history/politics) when it becomes identified with a performance (a Wild West show/movies). In the film’s two best scenes, ‘Colonel Cody’ briefly crystallises Health’s straying thoughts on the unreality of the reality of politics. Confronting Isabella, and abusing her for thinking she could take over the organisation he claims to control, he finally determines that her beliefs are genuine, i.e. that she is ‘real’, and therefore no threat to anyone. Then, confronting Gloria and abusing her for impulsively coming out in support of Isabella, he declares that neither she nor the White House are beyond his possibly lethal reach.

In Altman’s own expression, the real danger of the Colonel is that he is so crazy that people believe him. But his link with the past, however spurious, represents the most lucid symbol in the film for the country’s betrayed ideals. In a contemporary context, Altman’s identification of what he is doing with what he is describing is all the more instant and sentimental. His sham is the one we live in, the thin fuzz of ‘reality’ he puts on the screen and then leaves to its own devices encapsulates our helplessness and his authorial abdication. Ironically enough – given the assumption that Altman has supplanted genre filmmaking with a cinema of spontaneous combustion – it is only when he returns to the past, to something like a Western setting, that this identification becomes artistically interesting. Putting together a movie, recreating a society, in the rugged conditions of _McCabe & Mrs. Miller_, _Quintet_ and _Popeye_ is in itself a pioneer experience. These films consequently expand beyond the easy cynicism of _Nashville_,  _A Wedding_ or _HealtH_. At the time the town of Presbyterian Church went up, after all, Altman was known as the independent director prepared to spend most of his budget on getting the setting just right before cast and crew moved in, rather than the host of independent jamborees in which meaning has to be free-associated by cast  and audience.  
**Richard Combs, _Sight and Sound_, Summer 1981**



**HealtH**

_Director_: Robert Altman  
_Production Companies_: Lion’s Gate Films,  
Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corporation  
_Executive Producer_: Tommy Thompson  
_Producer_: Robert Altman  
_Associate Producers_: Scott Bushnell,  
Wolf Kroeger  
_Unit Production Manager_:  
Robert Eggenweiler  
_Production Co-ordinator_: Victoria Barney  
_Production Accountant_: Richard Dubuque  
_Location Auditor_: Ralph M. Leo  
_Production Assistants_: David Fitzgerald, Peter Bray, Chip Cronkite, Peter Hawkins, David Levy  
_Assistant Director_: Tommy Thompson  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Robert Dahlin  
_Script Supervisor_: Luca Kouimelis  
_Extras Casting_: Rick Sparks  
_Screenplay_: Frank Barhydt, Robert Altman,  
Paul Dooley  
_Director of Photography_: Edmond L. Koons  
_Camera Operators_: Jack Richards,  
Frank Miller, Mike McGowan  
_Camera Assistants_: Jim Blanford,  
Gerrit Dangremond, Jack Gary,  
Robert Reed Altman  
_Gaffer_: Randy Glass  
_[Gaffer’s] Best Boy_: Tom Thatcher  
_Key Grip_: Tom Prophet  
_Dolly Grip_: Clay Wilson  
_[Grip] Best Boy_: Bob Duggan  
_Stills Photography_: Melinda Wickman  
_Editors_: Tony Lombardo, Dennis M. Hill,  
Tom Benko  
_Assistant Editors_: William Hoy, Raja R. Gosnell, Stephen M. Tucker, Eric Whitfield  
_Art Director_: Robert Quinn  
_Set Decorator_: Jacqueline S. Price  
_Prop Master_: Stephen Altman  
_Costume Consultant_: John Hay  
_Wardrobe_: Beth Alexander  
_Make-up_: Monty Westmore  
_Hair_: Jerry Turnage  
_Title Design_: Patrice Ryan  
_Titles/Opticals_: Pacific Title  
_Musical Score_: Joseph Byrd  
_Additional Orchestrations_: Mickey Ingalls  
_‘Health’ songs written by_: Allan Nicholls  
_‘Health’ songs performed by_: The Steinettes  
_Music Supervisor_: Allan Nicholls  
_Music Editors_: Ted Whitfield,  
Richard Whitfield  
_Assistant Music Editor_: Leslie Whitfield  
_Music Recording_: Douglas Decker  
_Sound_: Robert Gravenor, Don Merritt  
_Re-recording_: Richard Portman,  
Bud Grenzbach  
_Sound Editors_: David Horton, Sam Gemette,  
Randy Kelly  
_Publicity Manager_: Bridget Terry  
_Publicist_: Tom Grey

_Cast:_

Carol Burnett _(Gloria Burbank)_  
Glenda Jackson _(Isabella Garnell)_  
James Garner _(Harry Wolff)_  
Lauren Bacall _(Esther Brill)_  
Paul Dooley _(Dr Gil Gainey)_  
Donald Moffat _(Colonel Cody)_  
Henry Gibson _(Bobby Hammer)_  
Diane Stilwell _(Willow Wertz)_  
MacIntyre Dixon _(Fred Munson)_  
Alfre Woodard _(Sally Benbow)_  
Ann Ryerson _(Dr Ruth Ann Jackle)_  
Margery Bond _(Daisy Bell)_  
Georgann Johnson _(Lily Bell)_  
Mina Kolb _(Iris Bell)_  
Allan Nicholls _(Jake Jacobs)_  
Bob Fortier _(Henderson, chief of security)_  
Nancy Foster _(Gilda Hoffintz)_  
Joan E. Block _(Joan E.)_  
David Fitzgerald _(desk clerk)_  
Nathalie Blossom, Julie Janney, Patty Katz,  
Diane Shaffer _(The Steinettes)_  
Dick Cavett _(himself)_  
Dinah Shore _(herself)_

USA 1980

105 mins
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbOTc2MjkwMzFdfQ==
-->