Initially developed as part of _Chungking Express_, _Fallen Angels_ shares a similar freewheeling spirit but it’s a much darker and moodier affair, exploring the nocturnal lives of assassins, femme fatales and mute ex-cons. Shot with frenetic verve by Wong’s frequent cinematographer Christopher Doyle, it’s a stylish drama laced with quirky humour that glimmers with the neon magic of Hong Kong at night.<br>
**bfi.org.uk**<br>

Not exactly a sequel to _Chungking_ _Express_, although it contains many playful references back to the earlier film and one sublime moment when Takeshi Kaneshiro parodies Faye Wong’s body language behind the Midnight Express snack counter, _Fallen_ _Angels_ offers a significantly darker account of what it takes to make it through the Hong Kong night. All five central characters (four of them with copious voice-overs in the trademark Wong Kar Wai style) are desperately lonely and on the edge of hysteria. The men are taciturn, prone to violence and emotionally blocked. The women are noisy, emotionally voluble and obsessive. But all of them are deeply solipsistic, and their moments of togetherness are hesitant and fugitive.

Partly because the two strands of narrative are loosely interwoven and partly because the film is shot and cut with such brio, _Fallen_ _Angels_ is hard to take in the first time around. It complicates matters that the story of the hitman and his lovelorn agent is moody, neo-noir drama while the story of He Zhiwu’s nocturnal exploits is farcical and often riotously funny; few films have ever dared to change tone from scene to scene with so little regard for the viewer’s ability to keep up. Repeat viewings clarify not only the twists and turns of the plotting, but also finesse the underlying logic of the film’s structure. Scenes turn out to be linked as much by the rhythms of movement and by colour as by theme or motif; what starts out looking like a patchwork turns out to be a fauvist mosaic.

The elaboration of the characters and concerns could hardly be more concise. The first shot, for example, shows the first ever meeting between the killer and his agent, and their conversation cuts to the quick of their professional relationship: ‘Are we still partners? – We’ve been partners for 155 weeks. But partners should never become emotionally involved.’ At the same time, the visual distortion of the image (it was shot through an ultra-wide-angle lens, which distends the space between the two characters) announces the way the whole film will be shot. And the image is in monochrome, which is the film’s convention for marking the isolated moments of truth between the characters. Wong Kar Wai maintains this density of dramatic and stylistic attack with a barrage of visual, verbal and musical information. We know from British press reactions to _Chungking_ _Express_ that this style of filmmaking is incomprehensible and/or inconsequential to our ‘senior’ critics; others, however, find it wildly exhilarating.

It’s the sheer density of the film’s address that takes it a step beyond _Days of Being Wild_, _Ashes_ _of_ _Time_ and _Chungking_ _Express_. The offhand wit familiar from the earlier films is still plentiful. But the resonances of the jokes are often quite melancholy; as is the fact that the hitman’s instructions to carry out a killing are coded as messages to meet friends. Loneliness is ultimately the film’s centrifugal force. It coalesces in the anguished images of the agent masturbating to assuage her longings for the hitman. Balancing these are moments of intense joy, the most spectacular being Baby’s brazen pick-up of the hitman and He Zhiwu’s videotaping of his father.

The overall sense of the coexistence of pain and pleasure, anomie and elation, is new in Wong Kar Wai’s work. The central ambivalences are rooted in the film language: the wide-angle distortions of Chris Doyle’s virtuoso cinematography create an effect of distance-in-proximity, while William Chang’s intricate montages never shy away from visual and tonal mismatches. The same ambivalence informs the voice-overs, which address the audience with the kind of easy intimacy that the characters fail to achieve with each other. Hence the disturbing ever-present sense that each emotion and each passing thought can be flipped to reveal its opposite.

_Fallen_ _Angels_ finesses these complexities in a world which bears exactly the same relation to the Hong Kong of 1995 as _Alphaville_ did to the Paris of 1965. If the film misses greatness, it’s partly because of weak casting: neither Leon Lai nor Michele Reis comes alive on screen, although Takeshi Kaneshiro and Charlie Young are impossibly wonderful, and Karen Mok will probably find ‘Baby’ as hard to shake off as Tony Perkins found Norman Bates. The bottom line is that _Fallen_ _Angels_ takes every risk known to filmmaking, and succeeds triumphantly a whole lot more often than it fails.<br>
**Tony Rayns, _Sight and Sound_, September 1996**

This spiritual companion to _Chungking Express_ feels like a seedier version of that film’s freewheeling observation of lovesick, wayward souls. Another flirtation with Hong Kong genre cinema, _Fallen Angels_ is something like his John Woo movie, a gangster film concerned with the city’s lonely weirdos, chief among them a hitman who begins to have second thoughts about  
his job.

Unlike the idealistic, escapist dreaming of the _Chungking Express_ soundtrack, _Fallen Angels_ is more interested in ethereal pieces, such as Laurie Anderson’s ‘Speak My Language’, a moody track speaking of the living and the dead, which plays in full over abstract imagery. Along with Shirley Kwan’s ‘Wang Ji Ta’, these tracks emphasise the bleak circumstances of the characters, who seem more like spectres haunting the city than people with lives of their own.

Closing out the film is The Flying Pickets’ ‘Only You’, perhaps the only track to express hopefulness, as two lovelorn characters find a chance to escape from the film’s seemingly perpetual night.<br>
**Kambole Campbell, bfi.org.uk, 20 February 2021**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE4Mzc5MjAxMDhdfQ==
-->