

Having crafted what many consider his masterpiece, Morricone was rightly dismayed by the fact that Herbie Hancock received the Oscar for best original score for essentially arranging the work of others for Bertrand Tavernier’s jazz drama, _Round Midnight_.

There are numerous highlights in the score for Roland Joffé’s Palme d’Or winner, including the interpolated sacred music of Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, but 3 pieces stand out. Used early in contrasting contexts, the ‘Iguazu Falls Theme’ conveys both the scale of the task facing Father Gabriel (Jeremy Irons) in seeking to convert and protect a 1740s Amazonian tribe, and the scope of the Jesuit’s faith. Driven by drums, the ‘Guarani Theme’ throbs with life in celebrating the culture that the Iberian slavers wish to crush and its combination with the exquisite melody of ‘Gabriel’s Oboe’ in ‘On Earth as It Is in Heaven’ reveals Morricone’s genius in finding an acoustic metaphor for the merger of two worlds.  
**David Parkinson, bfi.org.uk**

The sense of the ‘_mistica musicale antica_’ which so fascinated Ennio Morricone became a powerful element in one of his most celebrated scores of the 1980s, for Roland Joffé’s _The Mission_ (1986) – a film the composer has always said he feels particularly attached to. The resulting score should have won an Academy Award, especially since _Round Midnight_, the winner that year, featured jazz music that was not written specially for the film.

**Ennio Morricone:** _The Mission_ is a film in which I certainly recognise myself technically and spiritually. It was set in the 1750s, a period, in Europe, of important developments for instrumental music. The oboe’s theme is actually conditioned by the language and culture of the Jesuits at that time, but also by the fact that Jeremy Irons couldn’t really play the oboe – to start with, he just moved his fingers at random! That was the first element.

The second element I took into account was ‘Palestrinian polyphony’.  
Because before the Council of Trent [in the mid-16th century] and the Counter-Reformation, people used to casually combine sacred texts with profane melodies, and sacred melodies with profane text. The Council of Trent tried to bring some coherence to this… and the finest exponent of the polyphonic treatment of sacred texts at that time was Palestrina, who was a very important interpreter of these rules in Italy. Where the folk music in the film was concerned – the third element – I was creating an illusion because I had none of the indigenous musicians or instruments. I wasn’t even familiar with the music of the Indios – so I had to invent something that I felt was right, that I felt could have been. These were the three main elements. I do not love to compose music that is conditioned by history – I prefer to be free – but I had to take all these things into account.  
**Extract from an interview with Morricone by Christopher Frayling, reprinted in _Sight & Sound_, December 2020**

**A contemporary review**  
It is an old, old story, but Roland Joffé and screenwriter Robert Bolt make a brave new assault on it and for the most part honourably succeed. The true events occur in the Spanish and Portuguese possessions in South America in the middle of the 18th century. Jesuit missions threaten by their economic as much as spiritual success to undermine the authority not only of the colonial empires, but equally of the central Roman Church. More particularly, they look like souring the delicately queasy relationship between Church and States, in which the former turns a blind eye, in return for nominal allegiance, to the sinful depredations of the latter, not least their slave trading. A papal nuncio, Altamirano, is dispatched to adjudicate between the antagonists: the colonial powers who want to see the missions closed, and the Jesuits. Carefully weighing the shorter glories of the missions against the longer glories of the Holy Roman Church and Empire, the nuncio ﬁnds, regretfully, for the European powers. The Indians cannot believe that God has changed his mind. They decide to ﬁght for what they have made into a brave new world, and some if not all of the priests join in the doomed enterprise.

One who joins is Mendoza, a former slave trader himself, rescued from sin and converted by Father Gabriel, who himself will not ﬁght. Robert De Niro and Jeremy Irons are the centre of the character battle. But ﬁrst the violent Mendoza expiates his lifetime’s misdeeds in a penance to the mission on the high plateau. He drags the burden of his sins, literally, in a net behind him, a great ball of armour and weapons, the tokens of his former life, upstream, through jungle, across mountain and, agonisingly, up the vertical face of a cataract. It is the most spectacular of many dazzling sequences. It is crowned by the moment when the distraught and exhausted penitent hauls his burden to the feet of the Indians who were once his victims and sees them absolve him by cutting not his throat as they ﬁrst threaten, but the rope that binds him to the net, sending his torture crashing hundreds of feet to the river below.

At these moments, and there are several of them, Joffé is well in command of this emotional commitments. It has to be said of course that he has the world’s most powerful screen actor lending a hand. De Niro is simply a lap ahead; but then, part of the good director’s armoury is persuading the best people to work for him. Money alone won’t do it, and Joffé rightly enjoys his conﬁdence.  
But perhaps the best performance, since it is the most difﬁcult, is Ray McAnally’s. Altamirano is a subtle prelate, and McAnally does the complicated thing superbly: convey honest doubt, decent confusion, ultimate compromise, tragic self-awareness. He’s an attractive ﬁgure who makes the wrong decision. We never question that his doubt was honest, nor that the outcome was deeply suspect. There is evidence possibly that the structure, in which his report to the Pope forms the narrative envelope, incorporating ﬂashbacks, was arrived at rather late in the proceedings. It’s a small sense of awkwardness and complexity that occasionally conﬂicts with the clear directness of the tone, but it is not damaging. At least it enables McAnally to address us with all the ironic texture of the most advanced intelligence on display – and to confront us, the audience, with a ﬁnal bold post-credits accusatory glare.

But why go back to the middle of the 18th century for a moral history lesson? Joffé and Bolt (and David Puttnam and Fernando Ghia) have clearly felt the pressing lessons. Fortunately, Joffé has learned a light touch here in the analogy department. Only the piercing honesty of our world-class cinematographer Chris Menges occasionally burns an image right through its housing and lands it with a jolt on our doorstep; a heap of naked wet babies stacked in the mud awaiting the blade; the bemused ﬂight of the poor, the innocent, the betrayed down the centuries.  
**Gavin Millar, _Sight and Sound_, Autumn 1986**
<br><br>


<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTgyODQwOTA0Nl19
-->