
_+ pre-recorded Q&A with director Marianne Khoury_

A mother and her daughter explore together four generations of women from the same family, an Egyptian family, originally from the Levant, a family where life and cinema have always been, and continue to be, intrinsically linked.

This is an intimate story between personal archival footage where reality and fiction interplay and the autobiographical films of Youssef Chahine.

From Alexandria to Cairo, passing by Paris and Havana, a mother and daughter take us on a personal journey, both visceral and visual, as they question their emotions and destinies.<br>
**Director’s notes**<br>

I grew up in a family where cinema was our world, but unlike my family, cinema was not meant to be my destiny. For my late uncle, Youssef Chahine, cinema was a religion. For my father, his autodidact brother in law, it was a way to make a living.

I approached this film as an investigation, a journey into my lineage. I wanted to understand the source of our neurosis, our sufferings, especially on the women’s side of the family.

I wanted to understand this psychological malaise that is of an emotional and feminine nature, transmitted from generation to generation: from my grandmother to my mother, from my mother to me and, of course, from me to my daughter.

I chose a narrative arc born out of family archival footages and anchored in a mother-daughter dialogue: we discuss about life and death, identity, cinema, our dreams and love.

We confront the unspoken, the secrets, the pains. By exploring these existential and emotional questions, we dig into the history of our family; our identity, our geography. We get closer to the source.

This is my way of dealing with my grief.

By letting go, I can finally embrace cinema.

I can finally embrace life.<br>
**Production notes**<br>

**LET’S TALK (EHKEELY)****<br>
_Director:_ Marianne Khoury<br>
_Presented by:_ Misr International<br>
_Producer:_ Marianne Khoury<br>
_World Sales:_ Pyramide International<br>
_Screenplay:_ Marianne Khoury<br>
_Cinematography:_ Marianne Khoury, Sara Shazli<br>
_Editing:_ Perihan Mourad<br>
_Sound:_ Vincent Verdoux<br>
_Sound Design:_ Rym Debbarh-Mounir<br>

Egypt 2019<br>
95 mins<br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTM0NjQ1MTQ5MywtNjAwNTg2OTUyXX0=
-->