

Released in the very middle of the 1960s, this John Schlesinger film also feels like the very epicentre of the scene. Julie Christie’s Diana Scott seems like the girl who has it all, but being the life of the party isn’t all it’s cracked up to be. Just as the sixties were about to hit full swing, this sharp satire reveals the paper-thin reality of cover-story perfection.  
**Edgar Wright**

Jaunty, heartless and stylistically nimble right from its knowing primary-school-to-poster-girl opening montage, John Schlesinger’s Swinging London picaresque has a shrugging confidence and stinging cynicism that have weathered well. The irony-filled gap between careerist model Diana Scott’s heartfelt narration and her ruthless bed-by-bed social ascent still packs a punch, even as the film’s cruder satirical attempts (a tantrums-and-tiaras charity auction, a cod-Fellini decadent parlour game) have lost theirs.

If _Darling_ lacks the warmth of _Billy Liar_ (1963) or the emotional heft of _Midnight Cowboy_ (1969), its strong suit is its gimlet eye, ever alert to the hypocrisies of the bedroom and Laurence Harvey’s career-making boardroom. Frederic Raphael’s spiky script dissects Diana’s modus operandi mercilessly: ‘Your idea of fidelity is not having more than one man in bed at the same time.’ Yet there’s a curious dissonance between Julie Christie’s restless Diana, the quintessence of 60s New Womanhood, and the film’s class-bound 50s view of London life. Where _Georgy Girl_ and _Alfie_ are exuberant about the new British youth culture, _Darling_ sidesteps it. But Christie’s thin-skinned Oscar-winning performance brings pathos to the film’s misogynistic morality tale, which extended even to the original knicker-pink poster: ‘Shame, shame, everybody knows your name!’  
**Kate Stables, _Sight & Sound_, May 2015**

**A contemporary review**  
One day, someone is going to make a film about a model (or film star, or beauty queen) with a witty, daring and unconventional theme. The heroine will make a great deal of money; she will live playfully and extravagantly; she will marry even more money. The daring and unconventional aspect will be that she isn’t noticeably corrupted by all this. But not yet. To suggest that it could be anything but terrible at the top is apparently more than flesh and blood can stand; and the thing that surprises me about a film like _Darling_ is that people as thoroughly sophisticated as John Schlesinger and Frederic Raphael should accept the constrictions of so many flatly fashionable attitudes. _Darling_ is sometimes clever, often ugly, always self-conscious. But its view of the world belongs to the corridors of Wardour Street. Its disillusionment looks like that of a gossip columnist who has left the party with a monumental hangover, but will still be back next day to see how all the awful people are contriving to amuse themselves.

Apart from star-struck adolescents, who aren’t presumably the audience _Darling_ has in mind for itself, I believe people in general take a cooler and more sceptical view of show business and advertising than it suits those involved in these trades to imagine. The great glamour image is an advertising man’s four-colour illusion. To knock the props from under it, by showing the squalid, shabby, unhappy ‘reality’ (or, again, half-truth) below the surface, is, in 1965, an act of daring mainly to those within the charmed circle. And to be disenchanted, in any case, one must first have surrendered to an enchantment.

It goes without saying that a good deal of _Darling_ is clever, funny and spitefully accurate. The camera circles and jabs, and the shutter clicks on a freezing moment of self-disclosure. Surprisingly often, however, the filmmakers leave one in doubt about just what value they intend to attach to a scene. Perhaps some modern Savonarola might just pull it off, on his own terms. But that is not the Schlesinger-Raphael method: they are far too knowing, with their snatches of effete dialogue juxtaposed with images of greed and self-satisfaction.  
**Penelope Houston, _Sight and Sound_, Autumn 1965**
<br><br>

**DARLING**<br>
_Directed by:_ John Schlesinger<br>
©: Appia Films<br>
_Production Company:_ Vic Films<br>
_Produced by:_ Joseph Janni<br>
_Associate Producer:_ Victor Lyndon<br>
_Unit Manager:_ Ed Harper<br>
_Location Manager:_ Mara Blasetti<br>
_Assistant Director:_ Kip Gowans<br>
_Continuity:_ Ann Skinner<br>
_Casting Director:_ Miriam Brickman<br>
_Screenplay by:_ Frederic Raphael<br>
_Based on an idea by:_ Frederic Raphael, John Schlesinger, Joseph Janni<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Ken Higgins<br>
_Camera Operator:_ John Harris<br>
_Assistant Cameraman:_ Bernard Ford<br>
_Graphic Design:_ Ted Southcott<br>

_Film Editor:_ James Clark<br>

_Art Director:_ Ray Simm<br>

_Set Decorator:_ David Ffolkes<br>

_Wardrobe Designer:_ Julie Harris<br>

_Wardrobe Mistress:_ Jackie Breed<br>

_Make-up Artist:_ Bob Lawrence<br>

_Hair Stylist:_ Joyce James<br>

_Processed at:_ Humphries Laboratories<br>

_Music Composed and Conducted by:_

John Dankworth<br>

_Sound Recordists:_ Peter Handford, John Aldred<br>

_Sound Editor:_ Malcolm Cooke<br>

_Sound System:_ Westrex Recording System<br>

_Made at:_ Shepperton Studios<br>

_uncredited_<br>

_2nd Assistant Director:_ Stuart A. Black<br>

_Script Collaborator:_ Troy Kennedy Martin<br>

_Cast:_<br>

Dirk Bogarde _(Robert Gold)_<br>

Laurence Harvey _(Miles Brand)_<br>

Julie Christie _(Diana Scott)_<br>

José Luis De Vilallonga  
_(Prince Cesare Della Romita)_<br>

Roland Curram _(Malcolm)_<br>

Basil Henson _(Alec Prosser-Jones)_<br>

Helen Lindsay _(Felicity Prosser-Jones)_<br>

Carlo Palmucci _(Curzio)_<br>

Dante Posani _(Gino)_<br>

Umberto Raho _(Paolucci)_<br>

Marika Rivera _(Paris party woman)_<br>

Alex Scott _(Sean Martin)_<br>

Ernst Walder _(Kurt)_<br>

Brian Wilde _(Basil Willett)_<br>

Pauline Yates _(Estelle Gold)_<br>

Peter Bayliss _(Lord Alex Grant)_<br>

Richard Bidlake _(Rupert Crabtree)_<br>

Trevor Bowen _(Tony Bridges, first husband)_<br>

Annette Carbell _(Billie Castiglione)_<br>

Jean Claudio _(Raoul Maxim)_<br>

Georgina Cookson _(Carlotta Hale)_<br>

James Cossins _(Basildon charity M.C.)_<br>

Jane Downes _(Julie)_<br>

_uncredited_<br>

Hugo Dyson _(Walter Southgate)_<br>

David Harrison _(Charles Glass)_<br>

Irene Richmond _(Mrs Glass)_<br>

Ann Firbank _(Sybil Martin)_<br>

Tyler Butterworth _(William Prosser-Jones)_<br>

Angus MacKay _(Ivor Dawlish)_<br>

Margaret Gordon _(Helen Dawlish)_<br>

John Schlesinger _(theatre director)_<br>

Vernon Dobtcheff, Christopher Greatorex

_(art critics)_<br>

Brian Moorehead _(Leslie Page)_<br>

Helen Stirling _(governess to Cesare family)_<br>

John Woodvine _(customs officer)_<br>

Jane Pearl _(Jane)_<br>

Ray Lovelock<br>

Silvia Dionisio<br>

UK 1965©<br>

122 mins
<br><br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTg1ODkwMDE1MV19
-->