_+ On-stage interview with writer-director Asif Kapadia_

The Rajasthan desert in Northwest India is not a place where you expect to find a theatrical film shoot. It’s hot, inhospitable and far from the fleshpot of Mumbai’s Bollywood. Perhaps it’s less surprising that the one director impetuous enough to film there should be Asif Kapadia, a Hackney-bred Asian on a gruelling eleven-week schedule with a £2.5 million budget to produce his first feature. _The Warrior_ is a near-wordless magic-realist tale of a hired clan fighter from centuries past who one day decides to renounce violence.

That such a visual epic, set in a non-literary time and involving no European actors, should, however vestigially, have come from the British film industry is remarkable and a welcome change from the UK norm. As Kapadia, who attended London’s National School of Film and Television, says: ‘When I was making _The Warrior_ there were a lot of handheld, chasing-people-down-the-street films in Britain and that wasn’t my taste. I’m not interested in cutting for the sake of it. It wasn’t a case of forcing the story along by using cuts, here each cut had to be motivated.’

The motivation for the warrior’s change of lifestyle comes when he’s ordered by his chieftain to wipe out a village that has been unable to pay its tithe because its crops have failed. In the midst of his trademark burning and slaughter, Lafcadia encounters a young girl wearing a medallion that belonged to his son Katiba, a boy unsuited to the warrior life. Poised to hack off her head, Lafcadia is transported in a vision out of the desert to mountain scenery. Even when the vision fades, he’s left with snow under his shoes to show him the experience was significant. When he gives up his trade, his former comrades are ordered to find and behead him. His ex-cohort Biswas decapitates someone resembling Lafcadia and the corpse’s head is presented to Katiba to authenticate in a scene which Kapadia says was the inspiration for the whole film. It took him into unexpected realms of experience. ‘I had never dealt with action scenes before,’ he says, ‘and suddenly we were writing a script dealing with horses, hundreds of extras and a sandstorm. I said, “Right, I’ve no idea how we’re going to shoot this, but it’ll be fun learning”.’

The part of Lafcadia the warrior, is played by Irfan Khan, who trained at the National School of Drama in New Delhi. ‘He doesn’t have the typical Bollywood pretty face, so he doesn’t get starring roles, but in India he’s considered one of the country’s best actors. He was recommended to me by Tigmanshu Dhulia, the casting director on Shekhar Kapur’s _Bandit Queen_, a film that has something of the texture I was looking for. Irfan has real presence, and I liked the way he carried himself. The character doesn’t talk very much, and Irfan was perfect because he has a way of giving so much just with his eyes, as though he’s seen a lot you don’t want to know about. Also he has a real interest in cinema from outside India. Irfan might not have known all the films I would reference, but he knew Sergio Leone’s films, and Westerns and Chinese films, so he could understand the style I wanted.’<br>
**Nick James talking to Asif Kapadia, _Sight and Sound_, May 2002**

Against a panorama of chill blue sky, a man stands on the crest of a desert dune, shadow-fighting, armed with a sword. Nothing else is in the frame bar an ancient, twisted tree standing like a malign opponent metamorphosed by some passing deity. The opening shot of _The Warrior_ makes it plain where we are in a stark, mythic realm a million miles from the gaudy trappings of Bollywood. Even recent entries at the serious end of Mumbai cinema, such as _Asoka_, look lavish beside this pared-down austerity.

A closer comparison might be with Rajan Khosa’s _Dance of the Wind_ (1997), which likewise used visual simplicity and clean narrative lines to explore mythic elements in Hindi culture. But while Khosa’s film presented us with modern, rounded individuals constrained to measure their needs against timeless values, Asif Kapadia and his co-writer Tim Miller are dealing in archetypes. Several characters, including the protagonist and his chief adversary, are never given names (the names given here are taken from the film’s programme notes), and everybody arrives as if furnished with capital letters – The Warrior, The Thief, The Lord, The Wise Old Blind Woman. We never get far inside these people, and clearly aren’t meant to.

This makes _The Warrior_ a film to admire, but perhaps not one to warm to. Starkly presented as myth, motivations don’t follow conventional narrative logic. Under normal circumstances, for example, one might ask what Biswas, who has been ordered by his lord to bring back the head of the warrior Lafcadia, is doing leading his men on a private vendetta up into the mountains, looting and slaughtering seemingly at random en route. But on the mythic level Biswas is the hero’s nemesis, and so must simply pursue him to the death. Equally the nature of the mystical bond between Lafcadia, his son and the little girl who is found wearing the son’s amulet is never expounded, let alone questioned, but just presented as a given. Storytelling in this mode holds us at arm’s length and, with dialogue at a minimum, relies on dramatic action to hold our interest. When, as in the middle section, not a lot is happening attention tends to flag.

Visually the film is stunning, with the rich reds and ochres of the costumes set against the timeless contours of deserts or high mountain peaks. Kapadia, here making his feature debut as writer-director, has an acute eye for landscape, and his use of it as an emotional index for his characters’ development sometimes recalls Anthony Mann. But the story seems more like a stripped-down version of another classic Western, Clint Eastwood’s _The Outlaw Josey Wales_ (1976), with its wandering loner hero gradually reconciled to the violent loss of his family by the acquisition of a surrogate clan. Riaz, the young thief who attaches himself to Lafcadia, was himself orphaned by warriors perhaps by Lafcadia’s own band – and is later adopted by a market woman and her daughter whom he defends against an obstreperous customer. Lafcadia himself is also finally adopted by another mother-and-daughter couple with whom he has mystical links, and the old blind woman whose hands can feel violence in Lafcadia’s face serves as wise grandmother to the whole scattered group, her quest for the holy lake undertaken as it were in all their names.

And now and then _The Warrior_ captures something of the authentic otherness of legend. One such moment comes when Lafcadia, amid the mayhem of a sacked village, is confronted by the girl with the amulet given to her by his son. He is briefly transported with her to the high mountain pass where she’ll later find him, then, back once more in the heat of the desert village, where he lifts his foot to see a footprint of snow beneath it. The image lingers, gathering resonance as the film proceeds.<br>

Philip Kemp, _Sight and Sound_, May 2002
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMjAzMzA2MDMxMF19
-->