

The ground is churned, dusty, an un-English yellow. This, and the scattering of broken corpses, suggest we are looking at a picture of a place far from home. Somewhere the law hasn’t quite reached. Dodge City, perhaps, or one of those hot, dry locations in a Jodorowsky picture. But this is St Peter’s Field, Manchester, on the morning after the bloody afternoon of 16 August 1819, and the three living people in the frame are Richard Carlile, a radical pamphleteer from London; John Tyas, a reporter from the _Times_; and James Wroe, editor of the _Manchester Observer_. Grim and exhausted, they discuss how to put what they’ve witnessed into print. One man compares it to the field of Waterloo. And in that exchange, they coin a word for the next day’s headlines, for the history books, and for two centuries of commemorative art that encompasses Shelley’s ‘The Mask of Anarchy’, an overture by Malcolm Arnold, and the Mike Leigh film that puts these images on the screen.

_Peterloo_ is the name of the film, and the one we now give to the moment when a crowd of between 60,000 and 100,000 people, representing a wide variety of working- and middle-class opinion, gathered on a three-acre patch of open ground in the briskly industrialising settlement of Manchester. Their demands now seem rather modest: universal male suffrage, less taxation without representation and the repeal of the Corn Laws that had raised the price of bread just as wages fell in the slump that followed the Napoleonic Wars. This wasn’t a scene from _Les Misérables_: few came armed, many wore their Sunday best, ‘God Save the King’ was sung before the speeches. Violence, however, was the only answer they received. The demo was policed by a lethal mix of professional soldiers and barely trained volunteer militia, administered by a jittery and inadequate gaggle of magistrates, empowered by an administration in London which was increasingly paranoid about losing its grip on power. Cavalrymen charged into the field, sabres drawn. Fifteen or more demonstrators were killed and hundreds injured. As men, women and children fell beneath the steel and the horses, General Sir John Byng, the supreme commander of Britain’s Northern Forces, was having a flutter at  
York races.

‘I grew up a 15-minute bus ride from where this happened,’ says Leigh. ‘But we didn’t know about it. And loads of folk working on the film, who were from up north, had never heard of it. It was mentioned for about four minutes in my O-level history lessons in 1959, but there was no resonance. My dad was a socialist and I don’t remember him mentioning it at all, and I could imagine him pontificating about it at length.’ The evidence of how Leigh filled this silence is now crammed into his Greek Street office in Soho: two metres of box files containing research accumulated in the last four years; a stack of crates in which some of the banners made for the film are stowed. These, says Leigh, have already been raised again at events to mark the massacre, taking their place in the long tail of the event, and in the debate the film has stirred about Peterloo’s place in cultural memory.

Two decades have passed since Leigh first began travelling in time. It’s now hard to recall the bafflement caused when he announced that he was assembling almost 100 actors and singers for a costume drama about the life of Gilbert and Sullivan. How could a director whose process begins with actors and improvisation, rather than with a lonely writer staring at a blank screen, tackle a historical subject? Once _Topsy-Turvy_ (1999) was released, nobody asked that question, and the British past became as much his territory as all those modern suburban streets and living rooms. _Vera Drake_ (2004) set the controls for 1950, _Mr. Turner_ (2014) despatched a magnificently tumbledown Timothy Spall back to the final years of Joseph Mallord William Turner.

_Peterloo_, however, is a history on a grander scale. If _Mr. Turner_ was the Leigh version of the artist’s biopic – his _Lust for Life_ (1956) or _The Agony and the Ecstasy_ (1965)– then _Peterloo_ is his _Battleship Potemkin_ (1925), a film that is interested in portraying castes and classes as much as individuals, which it then propels towards a bloody and canonical scene. _Peterloo_ is the first Leigh film for which the press notes contain a diagram that arranges the characters by type – constabulary, reformers, the monarchy, the Home Office, the radicals.

The tree has many branches. Maxine Peake and Pearce Quigley lead a fictional family of Manchester weavers, who typify the urban working poor and conduct domestic conversations that supply the audience with the economic data we need to negotiate the story. Real historical figures – Rory Kinnear’s Henry ‘Orator’ Hunt; Karl Johnson’s stammering home secretary, Lord Sidmouth; Vincent Franklin’s snaggle-toothed magistrate, the Rev Ethelston – populate scenes that often require them to gather themselves in tableaux, as if Hogarth were poised to fill the air around them with speech bubbles.

The scale of the project, Leigh insists, gave him no headaches. ‘I’ve been talking for years about doing a film on a big canvas. I’m very comfortable with three characters on the stairs or in the back garden. But I’m a filmmaker who’s turned on by wanting to capture the world. The world isn’t always in one room.’ And, he adds, he has no fear of managing crowds. ‘_Topsy-Turvy_ wasn’t exactly a three-hander,’ he says. ‘We had more issues with the chorus wearing those awful thick Mikado costumes in the Richmond Theatre under heavy-duty lighting in a heatwave than we had with all those extras on the fields of Peterloo.’ Fundamentally, his famous process remained unchanged. ‘Most of the actors were with us for six months, in groups. The family, the magistrates, the military, the radicals, the moderates. I’d work individually with them, discuss the background, the politics, the event, do improvisation. The intelligence and commitment and seriousness of every actor was very impressive. There are lots of actors who’d be fucked if they tried to do this.’

Lots of directors, too, particularly those who might succumb to the anxiety of influence. How does a filmmaker with Leigh’s sensibility – one who avoids gesture, elaborate camerawork and editing – tackle the kind of scene for which Eisenstein created such a powerful model? ‘Dick Pope,’ he says, ‘the cinematographer, kept talking about [Kurosawa’s 1985 epic] _Ran_ more than _Battleship Potemkin_. If you’re a seasoned filmmaker with a proper film culture in your DNA because you’ve been watching movies forever, it’s just there. But I’m not a genre-monger. I’m not a pastiche-monger. The approach is still very stylistic. It’s just that the nature of the style is making it unobtrusively real so you don’t see the cinematic wheels  going round.’

During the massacre scene, Leigh makes decisions that seem positively anti-Eisensteinian. There’s a moment at which a nameless character played by the much-loved actress Julie Hesmondhalgh seems ready to become the Peterloo equivalent of the lady with the pince-nez struck down on the Odessa Steps.  
But Leigh, with an almost extravagant lack of emphasis, declines to produce the moment for her. And unlike the Cossacks, the yeomanry regiments arrive without fanfare: their murderous progress begins as a stumbling, chaotic presence at the back of a wide shot of the crowd.

‘I’ve spent a lifetime,’ Leigh says, ‘resisting voice coaches, dialogue coaches, stunt co-ordinators, fight directors, because I always thought we could just do it ourselves.’ _Peterloo_ would have been impossible without a cohort of mounted stuntmen, but Leigh took pains not to let them employ stock manoeuvres we might have seen in other dramas. And he can’t resist sharing a story about another small victory in the war against cliché. ‘At one point,’ he tells me, ‘there was a suggestion that we should employ the services of a storyboard artist.’ He handles the phrase carefully, like Lady Bracknell naming an inauspicious stretch of railway track. ‘I said no way. It will be a waste of resources. The guy will spend most of the time in his caravan, if not in hospital.’

‘In hospital?’

‘Yes. Because I’d beat the shit out of him.’

**Matthew Sweet, _Sight & Sound_, October 2018**
<br><br>

**PETERLOO**
_Directed by_: Mike Leigh  
©: Film4 a division of Channel Four Television Corporation, The British Film Institute,  
Amazon Content Services LLC  
_a_ Thin Man _film_  
_Developed with the support of_: Film4  
_Made with the support of the_: BFI’s Film Fund  
_Presented by_: Amazon Studios, BFI, Film4, LipSync  
_Executive Producers_: Gail Egan, Ben Roberts, Lizzie Francke, Daniel Battsek, Susie Bruce-Smith, Peter Hampden, Norman Merry  
_Produced by_: Georgina Lowe  
_Co-producer_: Danielle Brandon  
_Line Producer_: Chris Lahr  
_Associate Producer_: Helen Grearson  
_For BFI: Head of Production_: Fiona Morham;  
_Head of Production Finance_: Ian Kirk; _Business Affairs Manager_: Clare Coulter  
_For Film4: Head of Production_: Tracey Josephs;  
_Head of Business Affairs_: Geraldine Atlee;  
_Creative Executive_: Julia Oh; _Finance Manager_: Suby McCarthy

_For LipSync Productions_: Robin Guise, Peter Raven  
_Unit Production Manager_: Dan Turner  
_Production Co-ordinator_: Sarah Carswell  
_Production Accountant_: Rachel Proudlove  
_Unit Manager_: Henry Jepson  
_Location Managers_: Henry Woolley, Duncan Laing  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Polly Duval  
_Historian_: Jacqueline Riding  
_1st Assistant Director_: Dan Channing Williams  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Gayle Dickie  
_Script Supervisor_: Heather Storr  
_Casting_: Nina Gold  
_Written by_: Mike Leigh  
_Cinematography_: Dick Pope  
_Additional Camera Operators_: Lucy Bristow,  
Mike Miller  
_Aerial Unit Camera Operator_: Darren Miller  
_Camera Operator_: Dick Pope  
_1st Assistant Camera_: Gordon Segrove  
_2nd Assistant Camera_: Ryan Adams  
_Gaffer_: Andy Long  
_Grip_: Colin Strachan  
_Stills Photographer_: Simon Mein  
_Visual Effects Supervisor_: George Zwier  
_Digital Grading, Sound and Visual Effects by_: LipSync Post  
_SFX Supervisors_: Johnny Rafique, Nick Rideout  
_SFX Services by_: Elements Special Effects  
_Film Editor_: Jon Gregory  
_1st Assistant Editors_: Gabriel Smith, Heidi Freeman  
_Production Designer_: Suzie Davies  
_Supervising Art Director_: Daniel Taylor  
_Set Decorator_: Charlotte Dirickx  
_Prop Buyer_: Mick Pirie  
_Costume Designer_: Jacqueline Durran  
_Make-Up & Hair Designer_: Christine Blundell  
_Make-up & Hair Supervisor_: Lesa Warrener  
_Title Design_: Chris Allies  
_Colourist_: Adam Inglis  
_Music Composed by_: Gary Yershon  
_Music Conducted by_: Terry Davies  
_Sound Designer_: Robert Ireland  
_Additional Sound Recordists_: Keith Branch,  
Sam Diamond  
_Production Sound Mixer_: Tim Fraser  
_Boom Operator_: Ben Collinson  
_Re-recording Mixer_: Robert Farr  
_Supervising Sound Editor_: Lee Herrick  
_Stunt Co-ordinators_: Steve Dent, Maurice Lee  
_Military Adviser_: Paul Biddiss  
_Armourers_: Bapty & Co., Ben Rothwell,

Charles Bodycomb  
_Horse Trainers_: Charlotte Dent, Charlotte Dent

_Cast__:_  
Rory Kinnear _(Henry Hunt)_  
Maxine Peake _(Nellie)_  
Pearce Quigley _(Joshua)_  
David Moorst _(Joseph)_  
Rachel Finnegan _(Mary)_  
Tom Meredith _(Robert)_  
Simona Bitmate _(Esther)_  
Robert Wilfort _(Lord Liverpool, the Prime Minister)_  
Karl Johnson _(Lord Sidmouth, the Home Secretary)_  
Sam Troughton _(Mr Hobhouse)_  
Roger Sloman _(Mr Grout)_  
Kenneth Hadley _(Mr Golightly)_  
Tom Edward-Kane _(Mr Cobb)_  
Lizzy McInnerny _(Mrs Moss)_  
Alastair MacKenzie _(General Sir John Byng)_  
Neil Bell _(Samuel Bamford)_  
Lisa Millett _(Jemima Bamford)_  
Philip Jackson _(John Knight)_  
John Paul Hurley _(John Thacker Saxton)_  
Tom Gill _(Joseph Johnson)_  
Lizzie Frain _(Mrs Johnson)_  
Harry Hepple _(James Wroe)_  
Ian Mercer _(Dr Joseph Healey)_  
Adam Long _(Wroe’s printer)_  
Nico Mirallegro _(John Bagguley)_  
Danny Kirrane _(Samuel Drummond)_  
Johnny Byrom _(John Johnston)_  
Victor McGuire _(Deputy Chief Constable Nadin)_  
Stephen Wight _(Oliver the spy)_  
Ryan Pope _(Chippendale the spy)_  
Dorothy Atkinson _(singing weaver)_  
Tim McInnerny _(Prince Regent)_  
Marion Bailey _(Lady Conyngham)_  
Vincent Franklin _(Magistrate Rev Ethelston)_  
Jeff Rawle _(Magistrate Rev Hay)_  
Eileen Davies _(Mrs Hay)_  
Philip Whitchurch _(Magistrate Col Fletcher)_  
Martin Savage _(Magistrate Norris)_  
Al Weaver _(Magistrate Hulton)_  
David Bamber _(Magistrate Rev Mallory)_  
David Fielder _(Magistrate Rev Gutteridge)_  
Finetime Fontayne _(Magistrate Clowes)_  
Robert Gillespie _(Magistrate Warmley)_  
Jonathan Jaynes _(Magistrate Tatton)_  
Nicholas Lumley _(Magistrate Rev Perryn)_  
Shaun Prendergast _(Magistrate Bolt)_  
Alan Williams _(Magistrate Marriott)_  
Dorothy Duffy _(Mary Fildes)_  
Victoria Moseley _(Susannah Saxton)_  
Virginia Bottomley_,_ Samantha Edwards,  
Julie Hesmondhalgh, Kate Rutter_,_ Katie West _(female reformers)_  
Joseph Kloska _(Richard Carlile)_  
Leo Bill _(John Tyas)_  
Brian Fletcher _(Edward Baines)_  
Gary Cargill _(John Smith)_  
Patrick Kennedy _(Colonel L’Estrange)_  
Guy Williams _(Lieutenant Colonel Dalrymple)_  
Ben Crompton _(Tuke, the painter)_  
Bryony Miller _(Bessie, Johnson’s servant)_  
Lee Boardman_,_ Steve Garti _(Nadin’s constables)_  
UK 2018

154 mins
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTQ1MTg2NzQ3NV19
-->