<![endif]-->

In September 1961, Frank Sinatra – the most widely publicised of the president’s friends – was a weekend guest at the Kennedy compound in Hyannis Port. Among other things, Sinatra used his visit to secure the president’s approval for the movie that he, writer George Axelrod and director John Frankenheimer hoped to adapt from Richard Condon’s lurid thriller  
_The Manchurian Candidate_. Sinatra had a deal with United Artists, but UA president Arthur Krim – who was also the national finance chairman for the Democratic Party – felt that the project was political dynamite. Published in April 1959, _The Manchurian Candidate_ had posited the outrageously paranoid premise that the Russians and Chinese had infiltrated the highest levels of American electoral politics with brainwashed dupes. It was a comic version of the John Birch Society’s so-called ‘Black Book’ – a samizdat that had been circulating among the true believers since the summer of 1958 – in which Birch Society founder Robert Welch identified President Eisenhower as the dedicated agent of a vast Communist conspiracy, who had been painstakingly manoeuvred by his Kremlin handlers into the White House.

_Variety_ had previewed _The Manchurian Candidate_ in late September [1962], a month before the [Cuban Missile] crisis, and predicted blockbuster results. According to director John Frankenheimer, however, the first public preview was ‘hysterical’. The film was denounced by the American Legion and the Communist Party; the day before it opened, it was attacked by a widely syndicated Catholic film critic as ‘anti-anti-Communism gone crazy, like a fox. Like a red fox.’ It had its premiere on 24 October, even as Strategic Air Command heightened its alert posture and Soviet ships headed towards the edge of the US quarantine. (So did _We’ll Bury You!_, a newsreel compilation distributed by Columbia Pictures. ‘It was a grim experience,’ _The New York_ _Times_ reported, ‘to sit in a darkened theatre, watch a chillingly convincing documentary on the spread of Communism and wonder, meanwhile, what was developing on the high seas.’)

Politics as spectacle, _The Manchurian Candidate_ is the quintessential Kennedy-era thriller, a movie which conflates right-wing demagogues and the international communist conspiracy, mind control and assassination, uncorking a plot which, as one conspirator brags, would ‘rally a nation of television viewers to sweep us into the White House with powers that make martial law look like anarchy.’ _The Manchurian Candidate_, which permitted its star to engage in the first-ever karate fight in an American movie, was Bond-like in its futuristic technology, robotic hit-men, sinister Asians (one played by Khigh Dhiegh, a member of New York’s avant-garde Living Theater), and jocular violence. But given its deadpan non-sequiturs and matter-of-fact integration of dreams, flashbacks and waking reality (modelled, according to screenwriter Axelrod, on Alain Resnais’ _Hiroshima mon amour_), it was far crazier. What was one to make of the continual identification of communists with motherhood, a costume party to which a McCarthy-like senator comes dressed as Lincoln to nibble on an American flag made out of Polish caviar, or the use of the national anthem to forestall the hero’s preventing the climactic assassination?

Andrew Sarris would point out that _The Manchurian Candidate_ reflected ‘a new conception of America as dangerously “sick”.’ But _The Manchurian Candidate_’s cynical, absurdist tone was itself ‘sick’ – in the sense with which the word had been applied to a form of American humour since the ‘Sputnikchina’. (Indeed, the jokey headlines occasioned by the failure of the Vanguard rocket – Flopnik, Kaputnik, Stayputnik – in what Tom Wolfe called a ‘hideous cackle of national self-loathing’ were an earlier popular manifestation of the sick.)

Like the john Birch Society ‘Black Book’, _The Manchurian Candidate_ offered a retrospective of Cold War concerns, from television image-building to communist infiltration of the government. Unlike the mildly futuristic novel, the movie is a period piece that has its climax at the 1956 Republican Convention. In addition to speculating on how a McCarthy might have been nominated, it took an extremely literal and highly fanciful view of behavioural modification, or ‘brainwashing’. Associated with Chinese propaganda, the term was in common usage by the end of the Korean War. Indeed, _The Manchurian Candidate_ became an explanation for brainwashing – so much so that a 1979 ABC documentary on CIA ‘mind control’ used clips from the movie to illustrate its thesis. By that time, _The Manchurian Candidate_ had been out of circulation for almost a decade, withdrawn by Sinatra in the early 70s.

Sinatra’s alleged reasons for suppressing _The Manchurian Candidate_ have become incorporated in the film’s meaning. He was, it was said, disturbed at having produced so prophetic a vision. (At the same time that Sinatra pulled _The Manchurian Candidate_ from circulation, he also withdrew _Suddenly_ – an obscure 1954 movie in which he played a would-be presidential assassin and which Marina Oswald told the Warren Commission her husband had seen on Dallas television shortly before Kennedy was shot.) When _The Manchurian Candidate_ was finally reissued, after a well-publicised showing at the 1987 New York Film Festival, it was explained that Sinatra had taken the movie out of circulation in a dispute with United Artists over money. But although it has since become a part of _The Manchurian Candidate_’s mythology that it was a popular failure, the movie had supplanted _The Longest Day_ as the national box-office champion by Election Day 1962. Nor was it critically misunderstood. _The New Yorker_ seconded _Variety_’s enthusiasm, beginning a rave review with ‘many loud hurrahs’: _The New York Times_ was less than amused, charging Sinatra with ‘a grave sort of irresponsibility’. Referring to other unnamed Sinatra films where ‘truth has been distorted and angled to get wild effects’, the _Times_ compared his technique with that of ‘the ‘big lie’, concluding that ‘this does not do credit to American films’. When _The Manchurian Candidate_ opened in Paris in December the critic for _L’Express_ wrote that she left the theatre praying that something of Europe would be able to survive the impending clash between the two superpowers. _Le Monde_ concurred. Although the movie was ‘incoherent’, it would certainly help to fuel ‘anti-American propaganda’.
J. Hoberman, _Sight & Sound_, December 1993
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMzExMDk0ODQxXX0=
-->