Like _In the Mood for Love_, _The Hand_ is set in the hazy Hong Kong of the 1960s, but its characters couldn’t be more different from the earlier film’s restrained, haunted lovers. Originally conceived for the omnibus film _Eros_, the film – presented in this retrospective for the first time in its extended cut – tells the tale of Zhang (Chang Chen), a shy tailor’s assistant enraptured by a mysterious client, Miss Hua (Gong Li).

A hypnotic tale of obsession, repression, and class divisions, _The Hand_ finds Wong Kar Wai continuing to transition from the frenetic, energized style of his earlier films into a register that is lush with romantic grandeur.<br>
**Production notes**

Multi-director portmanteau films are a dangerous format: they don’t merely invite but virtually compel invidious comparisons. The classic example is _New York Stories_, which cruelly exposed the decline in Francis Ford Coppola’s creative skills by teaming him with an on-form Scorsese and a Woody Allen near his best. _Eros_ is an even more embarrassing exercise, since it was apparently conceived as a respectful homage to the nonagenarian Michelangelo Antonioni. But of the three segments on offer, his is by far the weakest.

Unusually for the portmanteau format, _Eros_ starts out with its longest and strongest segment. _The Hand_, shot in deep, rich chiaroscuro by Christopher Doyle, is suffused with the yearning, muted eroticism that director Wong Kar Wai has made himself a master of. It’s set in Hong Kong and begins in 1963. Virtually a two-hander (in more ways than one), it traces two contrasted trajectories: as an initially nervous apprentice tailor gradually gains in confidence and experience, the once imperious courtesan he adores sinks to the most abject depths of her profession.

Their relationship is bookended by two hand jobs, which might seem squalid but Wong deflects any such risk, treating both episodes with a delicate sensuality. When the couple first meet, the courtesan masturbates the young man with lofty contempt, as if to imply that this is all he’s worth. ‘Never touched a woman before, have you?’ she demands as her hand strays between his legs. ‘Then how can you be a tailor?’ Years later, dying, she offers him the same service – but this time, her body wasted and ravaged by disease, she’s giving him all she has left to give. Gong Li and Chang Chen, both pitch perfect, play out this doomed erotic dance with affecting subtlety.<br>
**Philip Kemp, _Sight & Sound_, October 2006**<br>


**THE HAND  (extended cut, segment from EROS)**  
_Directed by_: Wong Kar Wai  
_©_: Block 2 Pictures  
_Production Company_: Jet Tone Films  
_Executive Producer_: Chan Ye Cheng  
_Produced by_: Wong Kar Wai  
_Producer_: Jacky Pang Yee Wah  
_Line Producer_: Alice Chan  
_Unit Manager_: Si Chun Hung  
_Production Manager_: Carly Wong Tung Fa  
_Production Accountant_: Edmond Poon Pui Man  
_Post-production Consultant_: Stéphane Kooshmanian  
_1st Assistant Director_: Lee Chiu Wah  
_Continuity_: Chan Po Chun  
_Written by_: Wong Kar Wai  
_Director of Photography_: Christopher Doyle  
_2nd Unit Camera_: Lai Yiu Fai  
_Gaffer_: Wong Chi Ming  
_Visual Effects Supervisor_: Gilles Gaillard  
_Editor_: William Chang Suk Ping  
_On-line Editing_: Béatrice Bauwens  
_Production Designer_: William Chang Suk Ping  
_Art Director_: Alfred Yau Wai Ming  
_Props Master_: Wong Tze On  
_Wardrobe_: Luk Ha Fong  
_Make-up Artist_: Kwan Lee Na  
_Hairstylists_: Wong Bo Chuen, Bower Ng Yuk Ho  
_Digital Colour Grading Supervisor_: William Chang Suk Ping  
_Digital Intermediate by_: Mikros Image  
_Grading Artist_: Jacky Lefresne  
_Music_: Peer Raben  
_Music Editor_: Tu Tu-chih  
_Sound Designer_: Tu Tu-chih, Claude Letessier  
_Production Sound Mixers_: Kuo Li Chi, Chu Shih Yi  
_Boom Operators_: Hsu Yu Teng, Kang Yung Chien, Hsu Cheng-yi  
_Re-recording Mixer_: Michael Hinreiner  
_Sound Editor_: Grégoire Couzinier  
_Dialogue Editors_: Wu Shu Yao, Magda Habernickel  
_With special thanks to_: Carina Lau Ka Ling<br>
<br>

**Cast**  
Gong Li _(Miss Hua)_  
Chang Chen _(Xiao Zhang)_  
Tin Fung _(Master Jin)_  
Auntie Luk _(Hua’s servant, Ying)_  
Zhou Jianjun _(Hua’s lover, Zhao)_  
Sheung Wing Tong,  Wong Kim Tak,  Tong Siu Man, Yim Lai Fu, Shih Cheng You, Siu Wing Kong, Lee Kar Fai _(tailors)_  
Un Chi Keong _(hotel concierge)_<br>

Hong Kong 2004<br>
56 mins<br>

**WORLD OF WONG KAR WAI**<br>
**The Hand (Extended Cut)**<br>
Thu 22 Jul 18:30; Fri 30 Jul 18:20<br>
**The Grandmaster (Yi dai zong shi)**<br>
Thu 22 Jul 20:50; Mon 26 Jul 20:50<br>
**Happy Together (Chun gwong cha sit)**<br>
Fri 23 Jul 18:10<br>
**My Blueberry Nights**<br>
Fri 23 Jul 20:50; Wed 28 Jul 20:40<br>
**Fallen Angels (Do lok tin si)**  <br>
Sun 25 Jul 18:30<br>
**Chungking Express (Chung Hing sam lam)**<br>
Thu 29 Jul 14:30<br>
**In the Mood for Love (Fa yeung nin wah)**<br>
Thu 29 Jul 20:45<br>
**Ashes of Time Redux (Dung che sai duk)**
Fri 30 Jul 20:45

**2046**  
Sat 31 Jul 14:30


Presented in partnership with Janus Films and

the ICA
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE3MjQ3MTUwMTcsMTc3MzU2MzcyM119
-->