<![endif]-->

Like Keats, that other impermeably popular British Romantic, J.M.W. Turner has been a man for all artistic seasons. Championed by Ruskin as a supplier of the Sublime, he was later seized on as a proto-impressionist and even as the founding father of abstract impressionism (those vortices of grey paint in _Snow Storm_, the cloudy, briny swirls of his late work). In this rich, ruminative and wonderfully executed character study of Turner in his later years, Mike Leigh, himself a doggedly original creator, depicts his subject (Timothy Spall) as an artist _sui generis_ rather than a relentless modernist, but one who also embodies the early Victorian tug of war between tradition and the steam speed rush of modernity. Sucking up old and new eagerly, he is as struck by a rushing locomotive or a daguerreotype as he is by regular visits to Dutch old masters. Leigh’s taciturn Turner is omnivorous in finding fuel for his art.

The film is unusual among painter biopics in asking the audience to understand Turner chiefly through sharp-eyed episodes from his daily round, trotting from ducal dinners to rivalrous Royal Academy varnishings. Rather than unpacking his interior self via tumultuous relationships like Robert Altman’s _Vincent & Theo_ (1990) or Julie Taymor’s _Frida_ (2002), _Mr. Turner_ shows the artist being doted on first by his aged father (a sly, tender Paul Jesson) and then by guileless Margate widow Mrs Booth. Odd man-and-myth moments occur – a fellow painter noting that the passing Temeraire ‘would make a good subject’, Turner lashed to a ship’s mast in a snowstorm like a North Sea Odysseus – but they’re served up with wit and brio.

By Leigh’s standards, it’s a remarkably warm film, and not just in the absence of _Another_ _Year’_s well-honed glumness. Suffused with yellow light, Dick Pope’s cinematography is cleverly Turner-tinged rather than Turneresque, opening on a glorious Dutch landscape, and teasingly recreating a Petworth watercolour of ‘The Artist and his Admirers’ to show Turner’s creation-as-cabaret painting style. In the manner of Leigh’s _Topsy-Turvy_ (1999), the film is fascinated by the life of Victorian artists, truffling around after Turner from his spit- and-egg-laden canvases to his magnetic solar experiments with scientist Mary Somerville (a fluttery Lesley Manville). This is painting as performance art, lapping up Turner’s unnerving creative throes. Art is a compulsion here, a force that finds Turner sketching in a brothel, sobbing with misery after his father’s death. One that sends him staggering from his deathbed to draw the corpse of a drowned woman found outside his Chelsea house. There’s something very English, too, about the film’s eye for the artist’s class hopping, as Turner takes in high-class recitals and Academicians’ brawls with equal amounts of gusto.

Spall is simply magnificent, giving a fully realised performance that never sinks into caricature, and that is often extremely moving. Full of grace notes – such as the way his hidden hands clench to express a honour that his voice cannot on hearing of his grown daughter’s death – it’s a tremendously eloquent portrayal, mostly utilising a huge repertoire of grunts, which run the gamut from bulldog growls during courting to snorts of sardonic amusement at the young Ruskin’s gaucheries. Like Seurat in Sondheim’s _Sunday in the Park with George_, Turner channels his expressiveness through the extraordinary colour and light of his images. He is lavish with art and economical with words, though Dickensian dialogue runs around him playfully.

Turner, dogged observer and inveterate scribbler of storms and sunsets, proves a beautiful fit for Leigh’s own watchful style, replete with long takes and unhurried exchanges. Leigh was once rebuked by David Thomson as ‘a rapt observer of the process of acting’, but _Mr. Turner_ shows him achieving a thrilling integration of theme, visual style and bravura performance.

One gets the feeling that Leigh is deeply invested in this thoughtful meditation on the tenacity of the ageing artist, whose fierce will to make art has him pushing through his collapsing health to go beyond conventional tastes. Unbowed, Turner produced pictures like the exhilarating _Rain, Steam and Speed_ – _The Great Western Railway_, of which biographer Anthony Bailey observed: ‘It was a masterpiece. Nobody bought it.’ Tracing the arc of Turner’s popularity from society’s darling to the butt of music-hall jokes and Queen Victoria’s opprobrium (‘a dirty, yellow mess’), the film is both a paean to stubbornly personal late works and a glorious example of one. Humane,  
deeply felt and gorgeously executed, this portrait of the artist as an old man is a masterwork.

Kate Stables, _Sight & Sound_, November 2014

‘Turner is a very uninteresting man to write about,’ complained A.J. Finberg when working on his biography of the British Romantic painter in the 1930s. ‘His virtues and defects are all on the drab side. Everything interesting about him appeared only in his work.’ Not according to Mike Leigh. For 15 years the British director dreamt of making a film about J.M.W. Turner. His tragicomedy, drawn from biography but related with a healthy dose of creative licence, reveals a fascinating, larger-than-life and very contradictory character. ‘A man on a mission’ is how Leigh describes his and Timothy Spall’s portrayal of Turner in his mid to late years – an artist consumed by wanderlust, furiously interpreting the world with paint and ink, ‘a passionate, poetic clairvoyant’ according to Leigh, but also ‘a very mortal, eccentric curmudgeon’, generous and tender to some of his acquaintances and family, heartless to others. Spall’s nuanced performance is alive to both the jovial and surly sides of the artist, a figure whose behaviour, appearance and mannerisms rarely embody the gentle, picturesque qualities of his painting of moonlit ruins, seascapes  
or sunsets.

As with all of Leigh’s films, the characters in _Mr. Turner_ arose out of an intensive period of research and then improvisation ‘to define who they are, how they move, walk, talk, where they come from, their lives, their parents’ education, their tastes, their religion, politics, gastronomic proclivities, you name it.’ This involved Marion Bailey (who plays Turner’s mistress Mrs Booth) studying early sound recordings of Margate residents at the British Library, and Spall spending two years learning how to paint (‘We weren’t going to cut to somebody else’s hand in close-up’) and evolving Turner’s guttural repertoire out of a page-long account of how the artist spoke. Meanwhile, Leigh’s exhaustive attention to detail meant only selecting actors who could actually paint to play Turner’s fellow Royal Academicians, and spending a lot of time recreating Turner’s world – building his studio on to a Victorian house in Woolwich, recreating the Royal Academy at a disused Sheffield stately home, and even moving a steam train from Manchester’s Museum of Science and Industry to Wales to reconstruct the artist’s famous invocation of modernity hurtling out of the natural world, _Rain, Steam and Speed._

Isabel Stevens, _Sight & Sound_, November 2014



<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEwOTkwNzk3NDJdfQ==
-->