
A dark secret lies at the heart of _Inside Man_, Spike Lee’s otherwise upbeat take on the heist genre. The film casts Denzel Washington, reunited with Lee for their fourth collaboration, as an NYPD detective tasked with handling a hostage crisis and bank robbery. With its wisecracking script and twisting plot, _Inside Man_ bears comparison to such heist films as _The Anderson Tapes_ (1971) and _Dog Day Afternoon_ (1975) – both of which Lee screened to his cast during rehearsals. The true valuable in the vaults, however, is a document that threatens to undo bank chairman Christopher Plummer’s life of good deeds. ‘He’s been trying to wash that blood off his hands but he can’t do it,’ says Lee. ‘There are some crimes for which atonement is impossible.’

_Inside Man_ shows Lee swapping the passionate invective of _Do the Right Thing_ (1989) and _Malcolm X_ (1992) for a breezy playfulness. The director is keen, though, to rebuff any thoughts that he’s selling out. ‘You might not be able to tell it from my films, but I’m a relatively optimistic person. Most scripts I get sent are garbage, so when I saw something as well written as this I knew it was special.’

The film’s marketing has downplayed Lee’s involvement, but _Inside Man_ still bears many of his trademarks. Despite being set largely within the confines of the bank, it gives the same sense of his native New York as a city still struggling to lay to rest its ghosts as pervaded his elegiac post-9/11 _25th Hour_ (2002). ‘The wound is still open,’ says Lee.

He also injects the film’s generic swagger with typical moments of social consciousness. One scene has an American Sikh hostage released by his captors only to be treated as a suspect by the patrolling SWAT team. ‘He’s a fucking Arab,’ shouts one officer nervously as the innocent man is wrestled to the ground and has his turban removed and searched for explosives. ‘I put that scene in the script myself,’ says Lee. ‘If you have a turban on you still get funny looks going through airports. But the thing about New York is that everyone is a foreigner. You can walk down the street and hear five different languages.’

That the director plays the scene for laughs is evidence of how far he has moved on since his incendiary masterpiece _Do the Right Thing_ had American commentators predicting race riots after its opening. But where _Do the Right Thing_ offered a state-of-the-union address on race, _Inside Man_’s underlying concern is class. At one point Jodie Foster’s enigmatic troubleshooter, brought in by Plummer to retrieve his documents, warns Washington’s character that he’s getting ideas above his pay grade. ‘I wouldn’t say that class has superseded race in America, but it’s equal,’ says Lee. ‘What happened in New Orleans with Hurricane Katrina is evidence of that. Most of the people affected by it were poor, whether white or black.’ Lee was so angered by the authorities’ slow response that he decided to make _When the Levee Broke_, a feature-length documentary for HBO. ‘We’re still shooting it. What’s hard about the project is that the story changes every day,’ he says.

Lee was able to juggle _Inside Man_ and his Katrina project thanks to his breakneck pace of working. Despite its elaborate set-ups and big cast, _Inside_ _Man_ was shot on location in New York in just 39 days. ‘It drives me crazy waiting for the DP to light a shot for five hours,’ he says. ‘You can’t get good performances from actors if they have to sit for six hours in their trailers before they can come on set. With _Inside Man_ we always shot with two cameras so the actors were never waiting.’

Lee’s most commercial venture in years arrives when Paul Haggis’ Oscar-winning _Crash_ has once more brought the cinematic representation of race to public attention. Does Lee see _Crash_’s success as an indication that times have changed? ‘I just think the Academy didn’t want to give Best Picture to a film about gay cowboys,’ he says. ‘But I don’t know if the studios would even make _Do the Right Thing_ today. A film about racism by a white director is viewed differently from a film about racism by a black director. That’s just the bottom line.’<br>
**Ali Jaafar, _Sight & Sound_, May 2006**

The filmmakers, actors and publicists behind _Inside Man_ are keen to emphasise the movie’s links with the great cop movies of the 1970s: gritty New York thrillers like _The French Connection_, _Dog Day Afternoon_ and _Serpico_. Indeed, Russell Gewirtz’s brusque screenplay gamely namechecks both the latter two movies (‘I don’t need your fuckin’ status report, Serpico,’ hisses Clive Owen’s master bank robber to Denzel Washington’s bamboozled negotiator), and director Spike Lee has announced that the film is a ‘contemporary take’ on _Dog Day Afternoon_.

And yet, _Inside Man_ is even closer in spirit to Norman Jewison’s glossy  _The Thomas Crown Affair_ and its even glossier 1999 John McTiernan remake. For this is a shamelessly specious movie about an improbable super-heist, planned by a comic-book master criminal, and executed with a precision and preternatural awareness of police procedure that borders on the fantastical. It’s glossy, it’s upbeat, it’s superficial, and it’s wildly implausible. And for the most part, Lee, a serious cine-provocateur, has fun with this.

Working with mainstream producer Brian Grazer (last year’s _Flightplan_) for the first time, Lee orchestrates the high-stakes drama with a slick adrenalised urgency that wouldn’t be out of place in a multiplex actioner. The codified visuals of DoP Matthew Libatique (_Requiem for a Dream_, 2000, Lee’s _She Hate Me_, 2004) carefully contrasts jittery handheld shots from outside the bank with the slick steely moves inside and the inky saturated footage from a dreamlike interrogation room where Washington’s cop struggles to differentiate hostage and robber after both are rounded up (each dressed in boiler suits) in the confusion of the heist’s ending. The soundtrack score from Lee regular Terence Blanchard has undeniable echoes of John Barry’s Bond work swooning through it (utterly appropriate given the fantastical milieu). While the machinations of the heist plot itself, released by Lee in tantalising dribs and drabs, tends to lend the director the air of the surrogate criminal mastermind: like Owen’s Dalton Russell, he is pulling the strings.

The cast play their stock characters with gusto. Owen in particular, masked by a white scarf for over half the movie, keeps a tonal intensity to his delivery that never falters while Jodie Foster, in perhaps the movie’s weakest role, playing a high-flying corporate fixer, explores a hitherto unseen smugness that provides a surprising counterbalance to the saintly mom persona she’s perfected in recent roles (see _Panic Room_, _Flightplan_, _Anna and the King_).

In spite of the gloss, _Inside Man_ still displays intriguing hints of the truly gritty movie that’s lying just below its polished surface – a movie that Lee might have made for a less mainstream producer. The director intermittently picks at the racial and political sores of post-9/11 metropolitan life. A Sikh security guard, for instance, is forced from the bank and pinned to the ground by a panicked New York policeman who screams, ‘Shit! It’s a fuckin’ Arab!’ The security guard’s muffled cries of, ‘I’m a Sikh!’ remain, naturally, unheard by the cop. The hostages who eventually emerge from the bank are treated to rough racial profiling, with darker skins falling under immediate suspicion. The political tenor of the war on terror also surfaces in the heavy-handed interrogation scenes, with the interviewees cuffed, hooded and boiler-suited Guantanamo-style: everyone in the bank – both hostage and criminal is guilty by association just by being there.<br>
**Kevin Maher, _Sight & Sound_, May 2006**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNzMxMzM4NjI3XX0=
-->