

**SPOILER WARNING  The following notes give away some of the plot.**

In a role said to have been based on her nemesis Joan Crawford, Bette Davis plays Margaret, a struggling movie star desperate to relaunch her career despite being caught drink-driving. With the help of her daughter (Natalie Wood) and former actor Jim (Sterling Hayden), Margaret tries to find work but is unable to function outside of the industry she knows so well. None of Davis’ films in the 50s delivered the box-office success of _All About Eve_, but _The Star_ did provide her with yet another Oscar® nomination.  
**bfi.org.uk**

**Contemporary reviews**

Two recent films are dedicated to the splendours and miseries of Hollywood: _The Bad and the Beautiful_ is a journey towards the interior of Babylon and one of its mighty, full of incidents and encounters, in structure derived from _Citizen Kane_ and like Welles' film an attempt to explain the mysteries of a megalomaniac's progress; _The Star_ is a close, direct character study of a famous actress who has passed her prime and is engaged in a death struggle with box-office poisoning. The first is nearly a good film, the second does little more than provide a rather dilapidated shrine for a remarkable performance by Bette Davis, but both are agreed in certain verdicts on Hollywood – the ephemeral nature of success, the violent dislocations of private life, the follies of uncontainable ambition, the narrow corner round which luxury turns to squalor, the moment of triumph to the eternities of abasement. Each offers its own reiterated metaphor for the conditions of life in Hollywood; _The Bad and the Beautiful_ refers to ‘the rat-race’, _The Star_ to ‘the sleigh-ride’, but whatever the method the end of the journey is a graveyard of overgrown hopes and illusions without memorial.

There is no doubt about the centre of _The Star_: Bette Davis, introduced in a memorable opening shot, as Margaret Elliot, once a top-line actress who now faces a sagging neckline, greedy creditors, a squalid furnished apartment, and in fact the annihilation of her _raison d’être_. She is a star or she is nothing. Berating her agent and her sponging relatives, going on a binge with her Oscar, trying to preserve her own legend for the young daughter who is living with her successful ex-husband and his second wife, she at last manages to gain a test for a character part and makes a fool of herself by trying to play it like a young star – and a spectacular crack-up seems inevitable. A rich subject: but the writers, having gone this far – already, from many points of view, quite a long way – vitiate it fatally with a banal regeneration motif (a faithful lover converts her to retirement, domestic bliss and the simple life), and the director, Stuart Heisler, offers only an inept technique and an apparently total lack of imagination. Apart from what it intermittently gains by being shot in and around Hollywood, the film is so slackly and uninterestingly put together that, at moments, a point in Bette Davis’ own performance is sadly muffed.

All the same, it is well worth seeing not only for what it might have been but for the star; this actress of wonderful temperament and precision creates a vivid , genuine figure, alternately pathetic and exasperating, gay and decrepit, vain, impossible and defenceless. That the character does not achieve complete coherence is due not to her but to inadequate construction. It is a portrait clearly drawn to some degree from personal experience, but on the artistic level not in the least self-indulgent or self-glamourising. One only hopes the film’s conclusion is not a portent of personal intention;·for Bette, it can at least be said, is better than ever.  
**James Morgan, _Sight and Sound_, April-June 1953**

[The film] is redeemed, though not rescued, by Bette Davis’ performance.  
The part, a little less outsize than that in _All About Eve_, gives her better opportunities than she has had for some time, and she tears into it with a wonderful bravura display of rage, defiance, misery and ironic comedy.  
The tension and precision of her playing magnetically hold the attention, and, in such a conventional sequence as the drunken drive, or in the film’s best episode, the abortive screen test, she brings a vitality and an uncompromising conviction of her own to the fundamentally novelettish part.  
**_Monthly Film Bulletin_, April 1953**
<br><br>

**THE STAR**  
_Director_: Stuart Heisler  
_Production Company_: Thor Productions  
_Producer_: Bert Friedlob  
_Script_: Katherine Albert, Dale Eunson  
_Photography_: Ernest Laszlo  
_Editorial Supervision_: Otto Ludwig  
_Music_: Victor Young

**Cast**  
Bette Davis _(Margaret Elliot)_  
Sterling Hayden _(Jim Johannson)_  
Natalie Wood _(Gretchen)_  
Warner Anderson _(Harry Stone)_  
Minor Watson _(Joe Morrison)_  
June Travis _(Phyllis Stone)_  
Katherine Warren _(Mrs Morrison)_  
Kay Riehl _(Mrs Adams)_  
Barbara Woodell _(Peggy Morgan)_  
Fay Baker _(Faith)_  
Barbara Lawrence _(herself)_

USA 1952  
90 mins

A BFI National Archive print
<br><br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNzMzNzc1MzE4XX0=
-->