**Robert Altman on ‘Vincent and Theo’**

When I took on _Vincent and Theo_, I was very clear about what kind of picture I was not going to make. I’ve never seen one of those biographical films that I liked, and I wanted as far as possible to work against that. While we were looking for an actor to play Vincent, someone asked me what would I do if the ideal actor turned out to be left-handed. I said that would be perfect; then when all the critics protested that Van Gogh wasn’t a left-handed painter, I could say that isn’t Van Gogh, it’s an actor, a reflection. For all that, I think Tim Roth is very convincing; he has been to art school and he’s a good drawer.  I have a number of artist friends who were very impressed by what he did.

I also didn’t want to compete with Van Gogh’s art, and I didn’t want to try to paraphrase it in the design. There is a kind of painterly progression in the film, to do more with the influences and background of Vincent’s life. For instance, the early scenes in Holland were modelled after Vermeer, or the tradition of Dutch painting. The only painting of Van Gogh himself that I had in mind was not one of his self-portraits but the painting by Francis Bacon, of Vincent when he arrives in Arles, with the walking stick and the hat tied to his head.  
The panorama, which they visit in the Hague, I used simply because it was so surreal. When you actually see it, you can tell how the illusion is created, with a beach that has been built out in front of the painting. But when you photograph it, it loses that three-dimensional quality; reality and illusion merge, and there’s no way to tell what this is.

My feeling was that Theo was the madder of the two. He was desperately trying to stay in control and conform, although the rebelliousness kept breaking through. In another way, I saw them as two different types of non-conformist: Vincent was the beatnik and Theo was the proto-hippy. By the time we get to the Dr Gachet sequence, Vincent I think is feeling that everyone is mad.  The film at that stage takes a big turn for me, it becomes very stylised. Vincent was becoming more reflective; for the first time he was looking at the world and deciding that it wasn’t any place he wanted to stay. He was perceiving that the art world was changing and that he wasn’t going to be part of it.

Dr Gachet represented that world: he owned all these paintings, but we wanted to make a point with that line about how they were all kept in the vault. I consider Gachet to be kind of the heavy of the piece. Which makes it ironic that the painting of him has recently sold for over 80 million dollars. That hadn’t happened at the time we were making the film, but the Gachet portrait is shown there. When I saw the film again recently with some friends, that scene took on a whole new power for them simply because of the sale. And it was this silly doctor who in my opinion put the gun in Vincent’s hand. It’s he who makes the remark, ‘The world is a bad painting. God should have destroyed it.’

_Vincent and Theo_ was conceived as a television series, but I only undertook the project on the understanding that I could also make my own film within that. The television version is four hours long, but in terms of what we shot it could easily have been five. The main difference between the two is that the television version is much more linear, there is more logic and a greater sense of chronology to it. There is more of Vincent’s time in Holland and Paris, for instance. With the film version, I thought it could be done as a piece of music, structured more according to the emotional flow, the highs and lows.  With such a long film, I also thought that would make it easier to get the audience through the first 20 minutes, which is bound to be awkward in terms of exposition.

Before _Vincent and Theo_, I had been intending to make a film about Rossini, scripted by the British television writer Andrew Davies. This fell through because of problems with the production company in Italy; the producer has brought charges against me, saying I defrauded him. But if it hadn’t been for the experience of the Rossini film, I probably wouldn’t have done the Vincent film. It was intended to be a fragmented, rather Fellini-esque comedy, with an old Rossini played by Vittorio Gassman and a young Rossini played by Richard Grant. By comparison, the script for _Vincent and Theo_ was quite conventional, and I thought it would have been interesting to do both of these. Neither of them intrudes on the other at all, and yet historically they both take place at nearly the same time.

Basically, my point of view with _Vincent and Theo_ was that I was trying to do the story not of a famous person but of a failed person. Which might be the connection with the film I’m working on now, a contemporary, big-canvas kind of film called _L.A. Short Cuts_. It’s based on 14 short stories by Raymond Carver and it all takes place in the blue-collar area of Los Angeles. Each of the stories is self-contained but they sort of interweave; they’re not ‘plot’ stories, they’re about small things, little incidents, the lives again of failed people.
**Robert Altman, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, July 1990**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNDg5NzM4MzhdfQ==
-->