

David Moreau: We just wanted to make a film that would scare people.  We began by asking ourselves what is the most scary thing, and we also talked to people around us and a clear answer emerged: what people find most terrifying is the idea of an intrusion into their home.

Xavier Palud: We worked this idea as a base, and at the same time, we were location scouting in the Czech Republic for an ad. While we were there, our driver told us about an incident that immediately grabbed our attention. It happened to some Austrians who’d been living there for six months and it crystallized everything we’d been thinking about.

Moreau: To make it easier to identify with, we just changed the nationality of the protagonists. The story seemed clear and linear, with two characters that become victims to something mysterious. But we quickly realised that developing the script to make it work over the length of the film would be a  
real challenge.

Palud: In four or five months, we had our first draft. Despite being determined to produce the film, we still showed the script to four producers in order to get an external opinion. Three responded positively, and that’s how we met Richard Grandpierre. He was so enthusiastic that we decided to work  with him.

Moreau: We were very impressed by the attention he gave to the project. He liked our approach. He just needed to be reassured because nobody knew who we were. We learned to understand each other and we worked together with him in a very constructive way. In the film, we always tried to place the audience in the situation with the protagonists. We were committed to always show things from the characters’ points of view, to be by their sides and share their fear. There is one shot where Lucas comes down the staircase. We didn’t try to suggest anything; we’re just with him, step by step, in the rhythm of the mounting fear. The aim was neither to show nor to describe, but to make people experience.

Palud: We were also determined to use a lot of suggestion by never revealing the true nature of the threat. Everyone ends up imagining ‘their’ worst nightmare based on a situation they identify with. We didn’t want to force the viewer to be frightened by what scares us; we wanted them to be confronted with what they find terrifying.

Moreau: A well-stimulated imagination generates much more fear than any slimy monsters or bloody decapitated heads we could show. We weren’t trying to disgust or horrify, but to set people’s nerves on edge and terrify them. We also decided to concentrate on realism. To scare people these days, they must be able to imagine that what they’re seeing could happen to them. A couple at home is a very realistic situation with which it’s easy to identify. That realism is also created by slightly raw imagery, almost like reportage.

Palud: Rhythm was also an essential factor. The film is a succession of episodes in real time. Each important event is experienced at its own speed, like a series of tragedies that link together. We deliberately didn’t respect the normal rules of the genre, which say that after each scary moment there’s a period of calm. In _Them_, when things begin happening, they never stop. No breaks, no chance to catch your breath. You go from one fear to the next. The film is driven by the couple. You get scared along with them. We looked at many different people for the roles of Clémentine and Lucas. We didn’t meet actors and say ‘here’s what you have to play.’ We saw them and we hoped they’d be the characters. They didn’t have to act, they had to be.

Moreau: Our aim was to put the actors into the situation of their character as much as possible. They had to accept a certain amount of instability and that they would have to work and rework right up to being on set in order to adapt and seize upon everything that could be used to the service the plot. The film is not about intellectual dramatic art. The key elements are instinctive, vital and visceral. There aren’t any long speeches the actors could use to build their characters. They had to be them and to feel them. Because there weren’t any scenes of actual text, we based the casting on situations that had to be completely improvised. Olivia Bonamy and Michaël Cohen gave most in their acting and were the most reactive in the given situations. What’s more, they already knew each other and that helped their on-screen relationship. They’ve always been good friends.

Palud: We shot for 30 days spread over five weeks. We filmed in Romania, some 30 kilometers from Bucharest. We ended up finding a huge mansion that we renovated to correspond to the needs of the story.

Moreau: The building was so big that we were able to work in it like in a studio. In terms of the sets, we modified it here and there. Clémentine and Lucas are young people without the money to do up the whole property. The house comes with the job and only certain areas like the bedroom have their personal touch and reveal something of their characters, but the rest is very basic, with second-hand furniture that get a little lost in such enormous rooms. That adds to the feeling of coldness and insecurity.

Palud: For the underground passages shots, we filmed in the real foundations. The place was incredible and corresponded exactly to the feeling we wanted to create, with lots of passages for plenty of surprises, no visual reference points and narrow, pretty claustrophobic passages.

Moreau: Our idea was to plunge the actors into a state of fear in which they would no longer have to act. Often, the ambience of the place, the house or the underground passages was so sinister and strange that we didn’t need anything else to feel frightened. Olivia suffered in a few scenes because she’s scared of heights and is slightly claustrophobic. And she had to climb up very high on the house, and even in the underground passages she had to climb ladders and lean over voids. Rather than act against her phobias and suffer from them, she used them to feed her performance and her expressions.  
The actors were remarkably patient. It was our first feature and we wanted to pursue everything right to the end. Next time, we’ll go a bit easier on the actors probably.

Palud: It’ll be hard to forget everything we shared. I remember Olivia and Michaël during the scene where they separate either side of the fence. Olivia was amazing. She gave so much. There are so many powerful emotions in this film. We’re impatient to share it with the public. We’ll know we did a good job if the audience double-lock their doors when they get home!  
**Production notes**
<br><br>

**THEM (ILS)**  
_Directors_: David Moreau, Xavier Palud  
©_/Co-production_: Eskwad, StudioCanal,  Castel Films SRL  
_In association with_: Canal+, CinéCinéma  
_International Sales_: StudioCanal  
_French theatrical distributor_: Mars Distribution  
_Presented by_: Richard Grandpierre  
_Executive Producer (Romanian Unit)_:  Cristi Bostanescu  
_Producer (French Unit)_: Richard Grandpierre  
_Producer (Romanian Unit)_: Vlad Paunescu  
_Unit Production Manager_: Andreea Iordache  
_Assistant [Unit Production Manager]_: Iulia Lungu  
_Unit Manager_: Nicolas Dancel  
_Preparation Unit Manager_: Eduard Dafinoiu  
_Production Managers (French Unit)_:  Nathalie Lampre, Frédéric Doniguian  
_Production Manager (Romanian Unit)_:  Elena Valeanu  
_Production Supervisor_: Bogdan Moncea  
_Production Co-ordinator_: Oana Topliceanu  
_Cashier_: Ruxandra Popescu  
_Production Administrator_: Lavinia Mercea  
_Assistant Production Administrator_: Viki Gospodaru  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Doris Yoba  
_Production Assistant_: Julia Rudich  
_Customs Liaison_: Teodor (Dori) Mercea  
_1st Assistant Director_: Franck Vestiel  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Oana Ene  
_3rd Assistant Director_: Horatiu Bob  
_Script Supervisor_: Julien Boeuf  
_Casting (French Unit)_: Guillaume Moulin,  David Bertrand  
_Casting Director (Romanian Unit)_: Floriela Grapini  
_Extras Casting (Romanian Unit)_: Ovidiu Paunescu  
_Screenplay_: David Moreau, Xavier Palud  
_Director of Photography_: Axel Cosnefroy  
_1st Assistant Camera_: Gigel Dumitrescu  
_Camera Technician_: Adrian Silisteanu  
_Gaffer_: Stefan Tarzioru  
_Electricians_: Florin Mihalache, Mihai Adrian,  Catalin Grigoras, Cristi Peagu  
_Video Assistant_: Laurentiu Ivan  
_Special Effects Technician_: Daniel Parvulescu  
_Special Effects Assistant_: Viorel Militaru  
_Editor_: Nicolas Sarkissian  
_Art Director_: Florin Gabrea  
_Set Decorator_: Mircea Onisoru  
_Assistant Set Decorator_: Ilinca Marin  
_Set Dresser_: Florin Mirghes  
_Assistant Set Dresser_: Stefan Preda  
_Properties_: Alexandra Botoi  
_Properties Assistant_: Andi Rosu  
_Lead Man_: Ionel Manolache  
_Construction Manager_: Dodo  
_Swing Gang 1_: George Marin  
_Swing Gang 2_: Gabriel Ciufu  
_Costumes (French Unit)_: Elisabeth Méhu  
_Costume Designer (Romanian Unit)_:  Oana Paunescu  
_Assistant Costume Designer (Romanian Unit)_:  Ioana Popescu  
_Key Make-up_: Dana Roseanu  
_Hairstylist/Wigs_: Lidia Constantin  
_Laboratories_: Scanlab, LTC St. Cloud, CinéStéréo  
_Original Music Composed/Conducted by_:  René-Marc Bini  
_Additional Programming_: Guillaume Thomas  
_Musicians (Soloists)_: Anne-Claire Cazalet,  Akosh Szelevenyi  
_Music Supervisor_: Patrick Aumigny  
_Music Mixing_: Studio Tex Avril  
_Music Recordist_: Philippe Avril  
_Sound Recordist (French Unit)_: Madone Charpail  
_Sound Recordist (Romanian Unit)_: Viorel Dobre  
_Boom Operator (French Unit)_: Thomas Pietrucci  
_Boom Operator (Romanian Unit)_: Vadim Staver  
_Sound Mixer_: François Hors  
_Sound Editor_: Germain Boulay  
_Dialogue Editor_: Serge Rouquairol  
_Sound Effects_: Pascal Dédeye  
_Sound Effects Recordist_: Didier Lesage  
_ADR Recordist_: Marion Lorthioir  
_ADR (Trainee Recordist)_: Déborah Stauffer  
_Stunt Co-ordinator (Romanian Unit)_:  Valentin Vasilescu  
_Stunts (French Unit)_: Stéphane Boulay,  Jean-Benoît Guillon  
_Stunts (Romanian Unit)_: George Iulian, Aurel Dicu, Florin Barcun, Daniel Pasleaga  
_Miss [Olivia] Bonamy’s Double_: Mihaela Oros  
_Mr [Michaël] Cohen’s Double_: Nicu Constantin  
_Transport Co-ordinator_: Octavian Tudor  
_Press Relations_: Fox Press, Laurent Renard

**Cast**  
Olivia Bonamy _(Clémentine)_  
Michaël Cohen _(Lucas)_  
Adriana Moca _(Ileana)_  
Maria Roman _(Sanda)_  
Camelia Maxim _(Maria)_  
Alexandru Boghiu _(the child)_  
Emanuel Stefanuc _(adolescent 1)_  
Horia Ioan _(adolescent 2)_  
Stefan Cornic _(adolescent 3)_  
George Iulian _(adolescent 4)_

France-Romania 2005©  
77 mins<br>
<br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNzk5ODczMTQwXX0=
-->