
<![endif]-->

The vertical threads are the passing days. The horizontal ones are the lives of mankind. The people of Iorph live far away from the lands of men, weaving the happenings of each day into fabric called Hibiol. They live for centuries, yet maintain the appearance they had in their late teens, and are known as  
‘The Clan of Partings’ and treated as a living legend.

Maquia, an orphaned Iorph girl, lives her life peacefully surrounded by friends, but somehow feels ‘alone’. But the peaceful lives of the Iorph are shattered in an instant when the Mezarte army, seeking the blood that grants them long life, invades on beasts called Renato. Amidst the despair and chaos, Leilia, the most beautiful of the Iorph girls, is kidnapped by the Mezarte, and Krim, a young boy who Maquia secretly has feeling for, goes missing. Maquia manages to escape, but loses her friends and her home… As she wanders through a dark forest with an empty heart, she encounters a baby who is ‘alone’, after just having lost its parents. Ariel grows into a young boy. Even as time passes, Maquia retains the form of a young girl. The same seasons, but different flows of time. As the era changes, the bond between them changes too. This is a story of irreplaceable time, woven by two people who are alone.

**Production notes, sayoasa.jp**

For all the prevalence of young women protagonists in Japanese animation, female directors remain something of a rarity. Following Naoko Yamato’s  
_A Silent Voice_ (2016), _Maquia: When the Promised Flower Blooms_ becomes just the second anime feature directed by a woman to receive a UK theatrical release. Working from her own original script, first-time director Mari Okada presents a heartfelt allegorical fantasy that posits motherhood as a supernatural gift, yet ultimately a lonely business. At the beginning of the tale, the eponymous heroine lives a carefree if cloistered existence as a member of the Iorph clan, a mystical people famed for their longevity and the legendary magical cloth into which they weave their memories, emotionally connecting themselves to one another.

The plot unfolds over the course of a lifetime: not that of Maquia herself, but of the baby boy she discovers abandoned in a forest after she has been wrenched from her homeland by an aggressive and thoroughly masculine invasion. In accordance with Iorph custom, Maquia’s loving embrace of this outsider infant, whom she names Erial, sees her become one of ‘The Clan of the Separated’, raising the foundling as her own in the enemy city of Mezarte.

Maquia’s entry into the world of motherhood happens without any intimation of sexual activity, in contrast to the trajectory of her childhood friend Leilia, who is abducted to serve as consort to the Mezarte tribe’s Prince Hazel. When the child of their loveless consummation fails to manifest Iorph powers, Leilia is forcibly separated from her offspring, and takes to tending instead the dragon-like creatures kept at the foot of castle, whose powers, harnessed for the purposes of warfare, have similarly waned in Mezarte captivity.

Okada’s background as a prolific screenwriter with two decades’ experience in the anime world comes across in this by-and-large tightly constructed chronicle of Maquia’s relationship with her ward. If there is occasional confusion, it is due to the sheer timespan covered and the large number of peripheral figures popping in and out of the narrative. The animation – a first theatrical feature from the new P.A. Works studio – is generally impressive, if slightly generic. The character designs by Akihiko Yoshida, best known for his work on the _Final Fantasy_ videogames, adhere to the anime standard of limpid blue eyes and paedomorphic features – though the script provides some justification for this, since the Iorph characters’ physical form becomes fixed once they reach adolescence. The locations and costumes are drawn from a Hanseatic-era Middle Europe, with the Iorph homeland, rendered as a prelapsarian Rivendell-like utopia, providing a stark contrast to the industrial-military base of the Mezarte city, crammed with grinding cogs and Boschian jets of steam and flame.

_Maquia_ is clearly aimed at a young to mid-teen demographic, but its underlying idea – that the maternal spirit is eternal and cyclical, unlike the transient physicality of men, and endures in people’s memories right up until the point of death – results in some undeniably affecting moments.<br>
**Jasper Sharp, _Sight & Sound_, July 2018**

**MAQUIA WHEN THE PROMISED FLOWER BLOOMS**<br> **(SAYONARA NO ASA NI YAKUSOKU NO HANA O KAZARÔ)**<br>
_Director_: Mari Okada  
_©_: Project Maquia  
_Produced by_: Project Maquia  
_Production Company_: Bandai Visual  
_Producers_: Naoko Endo, Tomomi Kyôtani, Nobuhiro Takenaka, Nobuhiro Kikuchi  
_Chief Director [1st Assistant Director]_: Toshiya Shinohara  
_Screenplay_: Mari Okada  
_Director of Photography_: Satoshi Namiki  
_Visual Effects Supervisor_: Michiya Kato  
_CG Director_: Tomohisa Shitara  
_Core Director_: Tadashi Hiramatsu  
_Chief Animator Director_: Yuriko Ishii  
_Main Animator_: Toshiyuki Inoue  
_Animation Production_: P.A. Works  
_P.A. Works (Animation Producer}_: Kenji Horikawa  
_Editor_: Ayumu Takahashi  
_Art Director_: Kazuki Higashiji  
_Character Design_: Yuriko Ishii  
_Original Character Design_: Akihiko Yosida  
_Concept Designer/Art Setting_: Tomoaki Okada, Katsue Inoue  
_Music_: Kenji Kawai  
_Music Producer_: Terunari Yoshie  
_Sound Director_: Kazuhiro Wakabayashi<br>

**Voice Cast**  <br>
Manaka Iwami _(Maquia)_  
Miyu Irino _(Erial)_  
Yôko Hikasa _(Tita)_  
Hiroaki Hirata _(Baro)_  
Yoshimasa Hosoya _(Lang)_  
Yuki Kaji _(Clear)_  
Ai Kayano _(Leilia)_  
Misaki Kuno _(Medmel)_  
Rina Satô _(Mido)_  
Miyuki Sawashiro _(Rashine)_  
Tomokazu Sugita _(Isol)_<br>

Japan 2018<br>
115 mins<br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTQwMzk1NzA4MV19
-->