
_+ discussion with Ricky Gervais, Penelope Wilton and Diane Morgan_

_After Life_, the critically acclaimed comedy-drama created by and starring Ricky Gervais returns for its final series with six new episodes. Set in the small fictitious town of Tambury, the show follows Tony, a writer for the local newspaper whose life is upended after his wife dies from cancer. Whilst still struggling with immense grief for his wife, Tony starts to realise that making other people feel good is what can give him hope and a reason to live. After all, every end is a new beginning.<br>

**Ricky Gervais**<br>
Considered one of the most influential British comedians since Charlie Chaplin, (he received the Charlie Chaplin Britannia Award for Excellence in Comedy 2016 BAFTA/LA) Ricky Gervais is the creator and star of _The Office_, _Extras_, _Derek_, and the critically acclaimed recent Netflix hit _After Life_.

Gervais has won countless awards, and has enjoyed huge critical success for the outstanding first two series of _After Life_, with the third due to launch on Netflix on 14 January 2022. His hit series _The Office_ is the most successful British comedy of all time, shown in more than 90 countries with eight remakes.

Following the global success of his Netflix stand-up special _Humanity_ – which was his first in 7 years – Gervais returned to stages once in again in 2019 with his latest stand-up show _SuperNature_. The tour included 15 nights at the prestigious London Palladium, two nights at Wembley Arena, as well as many sold out venues around the world.

Ricky has hosted the Golden Globes awards five times, in 2010, 2011, 2012, 2016 and 2020.

**Penelope Wilton**<br>
Dame Penelope Wilton DBE is one of the UK’s most renowned stage and screen actors. Best known for her role in _Downton Abbey_ as Isobel Crawley, she became a household name appearing alongside Richard Briers in the 1984 BBC sitcom _Ever Decreasing Circles_. Other TV credits include playing Homily in _The Borrowers_ and Harriet Jones in _Doctor Who_ and Anne in Ricky Gervais’ _After Life_.

Penelope has had an extensive career on stage, receiving six Olivier Award nominations, and winning in 2015 for her performance in _Taken at Midnight_.

Her film appearances include _Calendar Girls_, _Shaun of the Dead_, Woody Allen’s _Match Point_, _Pride & Prejudice_, _The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel_,  
_The History Boys_, and _Eternal Beauty_. She is currently filming _The Unlikely Pilgrimage of Harold Fry_.

Wilton was appointed an OBE in the 2004 New Year Honours and was elevated to become a DBE in the 2016 Birthday Honours for services to drama.

**Diane Morgan**<br>
Diane is a BAFTA nominated actor, writer and director.

She writes, directs and stars in her own original comedy _Mandy_. The pilot aired in 2019 and following its success was subsequently commissioned for two full series and a Christmas Special, the second series is currently airing on BBC Two.

As an actor Diane is probably best known for her incarnation of professional dim-wit ‘Philomena Cunk’, who originated on _Charlie Brooker’s Weekly Wipe_. Due of the overwhelming popularity of the character the BBC commissioned two comedy specials and a series fronted by Philomena; BAFTA nominated _Cunk on Shakespeare_, festive special _Cunk on Christmas_ and 5-part series _Cunk on Britain_, all of which aired on BBC Two. She will be returning to our screens reprising the role of Cunk later this year with new series _Cunk on Earth_ for BBC Two and Netflix.

Diane stars as regular roles in several hit comedy series including Ricky Gervais’ _After Life_ (Netflix); Sarah Kendall’s _Frayed_ (Sky/HBO Max); _Motherland_ (BBC); _The Cockfields_ series 1 (Gold) and _Rovers_ (Sky). Other recent TV credits include comedy specials _Death to 2020_ and _Death to 2021_ starring alongside Hugh Grant, Samuel L Jackson, and Stockard Channing for Netflix and _Intelligence_ for Sky. Diane is also due to feature in _Sandman_ (Netflix) and _Inside No. 9_ (BBC) both due to be released later this year.<br>
>

**AFTER LIFE (Season 3)**
_Written and Directed by:_ Ricky Gervais
_©:_ Netflix Worldwide Entertainment, LLC.
_A_ Netflix _series_
_Production Company:_ Derek Productions
_Filmed with the support of:_ British Film Institute, British Film Commission, UK Government’s Creative Sector Tax Relief
_Created and Executive Produced by:_ Ricky Gervais
_Production Manager:_ Alison Aird
_Line Producer:_ Hussain Casey-Ahmed
_Production Accountant:_ Daniel Rivett
_Script Supervisor:_ Phillip Trow
_First Assistant Director:_ Matthew Gallagher
_Location Manager:_ Darren Pratt
_Casting by:_ Tracey  Gillham
_Director of Photography:_ Martin  Hawkins
_A Camera Operator:_ Martin Hawkins
_Editor:_ Mark  Williams
_Post-production Supervisor:_ Charlotte Dean
_Visual Effects:_ JAMVFX
_Production Designer:_ Richard  Drew
_Art Director:_ Jo White
_Property Master:_ Craig Cheeseman
_Costume Designer:_ Lindsey  McClean
_Hair & Make-up Designer:_ Roo  Maurice
_Original Music Composed by:_ Andy  Burrows
_Sound Recordist:_ Caroline Singh
_Boom Operators:_ Laura Fairbanks, Stephen Lee

_Dubbing Mixer:_ Glenn Calder

_Sound Effects Editors:_ Jack Gillies, Daniel Batt

_Dialogue Editor:_ Steve Berezai

_Stunt Co-ordinator:_ Ray De-Haan

_Animal Handler:_ Stuntdogs & Animals Ltd

_Filmed at:_ Troubadour Theatre Wembley

_Covid Supervisor_: Simon Marriott

_Cast:_

Ricky Gervais _(Tony)_

Tom Basden _(Matt)_

Tony Way _(Lenny)_

Diane Morgan _(Kath)_

Kerry Godliman _(Lisa)_

Ashley Jensen _(Emma)_

Penelope Wilton _(Anne)_

Jo Hartley _(June)_

Joe Wilkinson _(postman)_

David Earl _(Brian)_

Ethan Lawrence _(James)_

Laura Patch _(Jill)_

Colin Hoult (_Ken_ _Otley)_

Kath Hughes _(Coleen)_

Michelle Greenidge _(Valerie)_

Peter Egan _(Paul)_

Rob Woodhall _(Colin)_

Elsie Fallon _(Emma’s_ _colleague)_

Kate Robbins _(Penny_ _Spencer_-_Wright)_

Steve Brody _(Geoff)_

Jo Enright _(Vera)_

Wendy Albiston _(Brian’s ex-wife)_

Ricky Grover _(Micky the Gypsy)_

Tommy Finnegan _(George)_

Thomas Bastable _(Robbie)_

Marc Cass _(bad driver)_

Dave Hill _(old man in care home)_

Zak Douglas _(estate agent)_

Anti _(Brandy the dog)_

UK 2021©

Episode 1 & 2 44 mins
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE5NTEwMjcxNjhdfQ==
-->