
<![endif]-->

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

**Contemporary review**

As in _Persona_, the credits in _Shame_ provide some kind of key to what is to follow, only this time the sequence is not visual but aural. While the names of the technicians appear on the screen, sporadic bursts of gunfire punctuate what sound like transmissions from a short-wave radio-set, news items delivered in a babble of partly intelligible languages, whose immediate effect is to place the spectator in the same position as the film’s central protagonists, to force upon him a physical awareness of the impossibility of choosing or taking sides. For even with a radio that works, truth is a question of the station you listen to. Evil is always on another waveband, and anyway, if you could listen to all channels and understand all languages, how could you analyse and rationally assess what you hear when it is forever being interrupted by explosions in your own vicinity? Even before the film has started, we are forced like Jan and Eva to dismiss the news of the world as being beyond our comprehension, relieved when the film passes from the political to the personal, from the ‘difficult’ credits to the seemingly easier, more familiar terrain of the opening sequence – the intimate tensions and dissatisfactions of a married couple who have sought to avoid the difficulties of their times by withdrawing to an island cottage.

For though we do not yet realise it, the theme of the journey, which will dominate the film’s form, has already been introduced. Even in their sedentary retreat, the couple are already in mid-flight from a reality that will slowly prove to be ubiquitous, but which – though their house burns, their friends die and their faltering love turns to hate as a consequence of it – they will never understand as having anything to do with them. The purely negative form that their travelling takes reflects their inability to accept or confront their present situation, as of course does their physical unpreparedness for the journey (their car won’t start, they have no provisions).

And their attempts to escape in space are mirrored again in their attempts to escape in time. The few moments of pleasure that they experience either separately or within their fraught relationship are invariably stolen from some other temporal dimension than the present.

If _Shame_’s structure emphasises the futile escapism of the two main characters, this is further underscored by the fact that Jan and Eva are both artists, but artists whose work is shown – more harshly than in any of Bergman’s films – as having no possible relation to the world around them. Their art provides them with nothing more than a temperamental alibi, an excuse for withdrawal, yet in so far as they no longer play and their fragile instruments are reduced to the level of mere objects, it further serves to underline the self-centred materialism that emerges as one of their most conspicuous characteristics. For instead of using the artist’s isolation, as he does in his other works, to stress the differences that separate him from his fellow men, Bergman here presents it as a microcosmic embodiment of the moral afflictions of all humanity. The privileged position which the artist seeks to occupy loses all possible justification in conditions where his art can no longer be exercised, in the political arena already delineated in _Persona_ as being beyond art. In such conditions, the artist’s withdrawal from moral responsibility, far from differentiating him from his fellow men, becomes a metaphor for all human duplicity and self-deception; so that the external forces which here invade his island seclusion, though beyond his control, are nonetheless perceived as logical extensions of his refusal to tune his radio in on the world, his inability to respond with anything more active than horrified compassion to the body of the dead child that lies across his path.

Similarly, Bergman demonstrates the human inadequacies of the artist when stripped of the protective clothing of his art by creating in Jan and Eva two of his least sympathetic characters to date. Clearly what interests Bergman about the peregrinations of this supremely mediocre couple is the indiscernible point at which ignorance stops and complicity begins, the point at which they either realise that they are naked or begin to collaborate with the serpent. And in this respect, it is hard to determine which of the pair is the first to fall. For the idea of the impossibility of taking sides that operates on the political level applies equally on the personal one.

Despite the psychological realism with which the couple are sketched, the extreme formalism of Bergman’s direction transcends the plausibility of the film’s surfaces. And though death no longer wears a cowl, the result is no less clearly a morality play than _The Seventh Seal_. A telephone ringing when no one is calling; a church bell tolling on a Friday; an endless line of transports rattling along the road in front of the cottage: all these, while functioning on a realistic level, serve also – as strikingly as the omens in any classical tragedy – to portend the greater disasters to follow. And despite the surprising number of awkwardly comic moments, the resemblance to classical drama does not stop there. The soldiers on both sides, the civilian corpses or the chain of floating bodies distinguishable only by the numbers on their knapsacks, are treated as impersonally as a chorus, while in relentless close-ups Bergman concentrates on the changes that war wreaks on a tiny circle of people.

Eva, well-meaning, uninformed and uncommitted, can feel little shame for the nightmare in which she participates. She stands back from her life and accepts no responsibility for what she regards as the concern of someone else’s conscience. She stands back from it as we, spectators, may stand back from Bergman’s film, and then retreats into another dream – this time her own – but which she still does not understand. In this dream, she is walking with the child she has always longed for down a very pretty street, with white houses on one side and a stream with roses growing near it on the other; a plane flies over and sets fire to the roses. ‘It was beautiful ... it was awful because it was so beautiful ... I sat there watching the roses burn ... And the whole time I knew I ought to remember something, something that someone had said, though I’d forgotten what.’

**Jan Dawson, _Sight and Sound_, Spring 1969**

  

**SHAME (SKAMMEN)**

_Director:_ Ingmar Bergman  
_Production Companies:_ Cinematograph, Svensk Filmindustri  
_Production Manager:_ Lars-Owe Carlberg  
_Unit Manager:_ Lennart Blomkvist  
_Location Manager:_ Brian Wikström  
_Assistant Director:_ Raymond Lundberg  
_Script Supervisor:_ Katarina Faragó  
_Screenplay:_ Ingmar Bergman  
_Director of Photography:_ Sven Nykvist  
_Camera Assistants:_ Roland Lundin, Nils Fogeby  
_Grips:_ Einar Carlsson, Georg Skarstedt, Börje Krogstad, Stig Limér,

Jan Bergman  
_Gaffer:_ Gerhard Carlsson  
_Assistant Gaffer:_ Jan Nilsson  
_Editor:_ Ulla Ryghe  
_Art Director:_ P.A. Lundgren  
_Properties:_ Karl-Arne Bergman  
_Assistant Props:_ Arne Carlsson  
_Costumes:_ Mago  
_Costume Assistant:_ Eivor Kullberg  
_Make-up:_ Börje Lundh  
_Make-up Assistant:_ Cecilia Drott  
_Sound Recording:_ Lennart Engholm, Berndt Frithiof  
_Sound Mixer:_ Olle Jakobsson  
_Sound Effects:_ Evald Andersson  
_Military Advisers:_ Stig Lindberg, Lennart Bergkvist  
_Transportation:_ Gillis Roosvall<br>

**Cast**<br>
Liv Ullmann _(Eva Rosenberg)_  
Max von Sydow _(Jan Rosenberg)_  
Gunnar Björnstrand _(Colonel Jacobi)_  
Birgitta Valberg _(Mrs Jacobi)_  
Sigge Fürst _(Filip)_  
Hans Alfredson _(Fredrik Lobelius)_  
Ingvar Kjellson _(Oswald)_  
Frank Sundström _(chief interrogator)_  
Ulf Johansson _(doctor)_  
Frej Lindqvist _(cripple)_  
Rune Lindström _(stout man)_  
Willy Peters _(elder officer)_  
Bengt Eklund _(guard)_  
Åke Jörnfalk _(condemned man)_  
Vilgot Sjöman _(interviewer)_  
Lars Amble _(officer)_  
Björn Thambert _(Johan, the deserter)_  
Karl-Erik Forsberg _(secretary)_  
Gösta Prüzelius _(rector)_  
Brita Öberg _(woman in interrogation room)_  
Agda Helin _(shopkeeper)_  
Ellika Mann _(woman guard)_  
Raymond Lundberg _(Jacobi’s son)_  
Axel Düberg _(pilot)_  
Stig Lindberg _(doctor’s assistant)_  
Jan Bergman _(Jacobi’s driver)_  
Per Berglund, Nils Fogeby _(soldiers)_  
Gregor Dahlman, Brian Wikström _(men)_  
Monica Lindberg _(woman)_  
Nils Whiten _(elderly man)_  
Georg Skarstedt, Börje Lundh, Eivor Kullberg, Karl-Arne Bergman _(men on boat)_  
Barbro Hiort af Ornäs, Lillian Carlsson _(women on boat)_

  
Sweden 1968<br>
103 mins<br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEyMDQwMjI2MDZdfQ==
-->