
**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

_+ intro by director Alvin Rakoff_<br>
A young secretary (Cusack) is blackmailed into spending a week at the flat of one of her bosses, who has uncovered her fiancé’s criminal activity. Sellers was ideal casting for Benjamin Hoffman, and gives his customary immersive performance, while Cusack – headlining for the first time – holds her own in a difficult role. The dynamic between them occasionally makes for uncomfortable viewing but Cusack is confident and uncompromising, and Sellers’ sinister touches give way to a more tender approach. Originally a TV play, this two-hander is saved from claustrophobia by John Blezard’s striking design of Hoffman’s pad, around which director Rakoff skilfully guides his actors.<br>
**bfi.org.uk**

_Hoffman_ is a film without much of a reputation, which is a shame because it contains one of Sellers’ most interesting performances. Famously, he considered the end result to be too revealing of his own personality and offered to buy back the negative from EMI. This in itself is fascinating because Hoffman is a troubled, dark character, a man who becomes obsessed with the woman he imprisons in his flat for a weekend for the purposes of blackmail. It’s a complex and enlightening turn, with Sellers appearing gaunt and grim, spitting out misogyny and simmering with suppressed rage. The film falls apart after the first half and never becomes the battle of wills that it promises to be – no reflection on Sinéad Cusack’s excellent performance – but it’s full of interesting things. It shows a demon inside Sellers which we now know to have been ever-present in his life and it’s not comfortable to watch.<br>
**Mike Sutton, bfi.org.uk, 8 September 2016**<br>

**HOFFMAN**  
_Directed by_: Alvin Rakoff  
_©_: Longstone Film Productions  
_Production Company_: Associated British Pathé  
_Produced by_: Ben Arbeid  
_Production Supervisor_: Bruce Sharman  
_Assistant Director_: Jake Wright  
_Continuity_: Doreen Dearnaley  
_Screenplay by_: Ernest Gébler  
_Based upon his own novel_: Ernest Gébler  
_Director of Photography_: Gerry Turpin  
_Camera Operator_: Michael Sarafian  
_Chief Electrician_: Sid Wainwright  
_Editor_: Barrie Vince  
_Art Director_: John Blezard  
_Construction Manager_: Ron Coleman  
_Wardrobe_: Elizabeth Adamson  
_Make-up_: Harry Frampton  
_Hairdresser_: Pat McDermott  
_Colour by_: Technicolor  
_Music by_: Ron Grainer  
_Sound Recordist_: Claude Hitchcock  
_Dubbing Mixer_: Len Abbott  
_Sound Editor_: Ian Fuller  
_Studio_: Associated British Elstree Studios

_uncredited_<br>
_Production Secretary_: Van Jones  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Michael Harvey  
_Focus Puller_: Eddie Collins  
_Clapper Loader_: Keith Brown  
_Stills_: Joe Pearce
_Assistant Editor_: Joseph Despins  
_2nd Assistant Editor_: Alistair Fryer  
_Assistant Art Director_: Tony Reading  
_Draughtsman_: Terry Ackland-Snow  
_Assistant Make-up_: Peter Frampton
_Sound Supervisor_: A.W. Lumkin  
_Sound Camera Operator_: Gordon Beavis  
_Boom Operator_: John Hall  
_Maintenance Engineer_: Dan Grimmel  
_Assistant Dubbing Mixers_: Eddie Haben,  C. Anderson  
_Assistant Sound Editor_: Len Tremble  
_Publicity_: Ruth Phillips

**Cast** 
Peter Sellers _(Mr Benjamin Hoffman)_  
Sinéad Cusack _(Janet Smith)_  
Jeremy Bulloch _(Tom Mitchell)_  
Ruth Dunning _(Mrs Mitchell)_  
David Lodge _(foreman builder)_

UK 1969
112 mins
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEzNDAyOTgzNDJdfQ==
-->