

Often lambasted as an exercise in style over content, Tony Scott’s take on the vampire genre is indeed a little showy, though given Scott’s background in TV commercials it’s perhaps not surprising. Pop-video clichés from the 1980s abound: doves fluttering among drapery, Bauhaus singing ‘Bela Lugosi’s Dead’ in a goth club, soft-core lesbian scenes and even a rollerblader grooving to Iggy Pop amid dry ice. But despite this _The Hunger_ has dated surprisingly well. Catherine Deneuve is convincing as a centuries-old vampire in modern New York, and David Bowie turns in an unusually understated performance as her doomed lover. The influence of Nic Roeg is in evidence here, in particular that of Roeg and Donald Cammell’s _Performance_ and the Bowie vehicle  _The Man Who Fell to Earth_.  
**Ronnie Hackston, _Sight & Sound_, December 2004**

As Ridley Scott was preparing _Blade Runner_, a script came to his agent for a film called _The Hunger_. Ridley’s agent is also Tony’s, and as the one Scott was busy the project was suggested for his brother, who had been working on a screenplay called _My Dog’s on Fire_ by David Peoples (‘very strange, set in the year 3000, basically about gangs of kids called Mousepacks patrolling the streets of New York’). Tony Scott, who in partnership with Ridley has been making commercials ever since he emerged from the Royal College of Art, created two films for the BFI Production Board but has otherwise found his career thwarted by the collapse of two major productions, cancelled at the last minute – one for Paramount, the other for Filmways. He met Dick Shepherd, head of production at MGM in the era of _The Goodbye Girl_, _Fame_ and _Clash of the Titans_, by the time-honoured process of sitting next to him in a plane, and when Shepherd saw a reel of his commercials (‘What really got to me was the Hovis and the Lee Cooper jeans’) there was no problem with _The Hunger_, which turned out to be a Shepherd project.

As it happens, _The Hunger_ is a film about accelerated ageing and the hunt for eternal life. Based on a novel by Whitley Streiber (who wrote _Wolfen_), it stars Catherine Deneuve as an immortal being masquerading as human, who drifts through the centuries in parasitical symbiosis with a succession of lovers.  Her current partner, played by David Bowie, discovers that he has reached the limit of the extended youthfulness his mistress has been able to confer upon him, and begins to decline rapidly into senility. They find in New York a specialist in gerontology (Susan Sarandon), who is researching the possible reversal of the ageing process, and she is drawn into the ménage with interestingly horrific results.

Scott admits cheerfully that the death-in-life theme has always fascinated him. Both his BFI films, _One of the Missing_ and _Loving Memory_, poised their central characters on the edge of death, and for _The Hunger_ the shells of unburied corpses preserved in an eerie semi-death at the Mexican town of Guanajuato (and in attendance at the credits of Herzog’s _Nosferatu_) were a particular inspiration. Echoing _Blade Runner_, _The Hunger_ includes references to progeria, an appalling disease whose ten-year-old victims have the physical characteristics of people in their seventies, and to the centres which already exist for life-prolongation. ‘We place the Susan Sarandon character in a “sleep clinic” modelled on those places in California where they believe that through sleep pattern and diet you can stretch your life by 15 to 20 years. There’s one in Austria, where they actually recycle your blood.’

There could be other cross-references between the two Scott films by the time _The Hunger_ is finished. Both productions have their allusions to ancient Egypt, both indulge in symbolism by means of a white dove (and with equal risk), and both have been shot through the gentle haze of smoke that seems to be a Scott trademark and which guarantees stunning quality of camerawork.  
Both films are themselves replicants of a kind, shot-for-shot simulacra of the detailed storyboards which the Scotts, each a brilliant designer, prepare in advance, drawing out their films on paper like miniature _Heavy Metal_ comic strips. Above all, both films rely on a wholly modern artifice, the often invisible application of special effects to impersonate reality. For _The Hunger_, the puppetmaster is Dick Smith, who in 35 years has altered states for everyone from Dan Curtis to Ken Russell and for everything from _The Cardinal_ to  
_The Exorcist_. Linda Blair’s revolving head, Marlon Brando’s jowls in  
_The Godfather_, De Niro’s bloodbath at the end of _Taxi Driver_, Katharine Ross’ ‘double’ in _Stepford Wives_, Smith has faked them all. Turning David Bowie into a 200-year-old for _The Hunger_ has been no more daunting than making veins burst from the faces of the contestants in _Scanners_.

‘The quantum leap,’ says Smith, ‘has been in the last dozen years. Now everybody wants make-up illusions, and the technical and chemical developments have come up with the materials for us to do the job. We discovered, for example, that the cleaning fluid trichloroethane causes foam latex to swell, and so we could raise words on Linda Blair’s skin in _The Exorcist_ or make an actor’s face burst open from snake venom in _Death Bite_. It’s no problem for us to make any kinds of limbs and do anything to them. We can make entire people if need be. Make them wholesale.’  
**Philip Strick, _Sight & Sound_, Summer 1982**
<br><br>

**THE HUNGER**  
_Director_: Tony Scott  
_Production Companies_:  Richard Shepherd Company,  MGM/UA Entertainment  
_Producer_: Richard A. Shepherd  
_Production Manager (New York)_: Alex Ho  
_Production Supervisor_: Terry Clegg  
_Production Co-ordinator_: Loretta Ordewer  
_Production Co-ordinator (New York)_:  Ingrid Johanson  
_Location Manager_: Gerry Levy  
_Location Manager (New York)_: Peter Pastorelli  
_Assistant Directors_: David Tringham,  Michael Stevenson, Debbie Vertue  
_Assistant Directors (New York)_: William Hassell, William Eustace, Roger Pugliese  
_Screenplay_: Ivan Davis, Michael Thomas  
_Based on the novel by_: Whitley Strieber  
_Director of Photography_: Stephen Goldblatt  
_Director of Photography (New York)_:  Tom Mangravite  
_Additional Photography_: Hugh Johnson  
_Camera Operators_: Bob Smith, John Palmer  
_Camera Operator (New York)_: Michael Stone  
_Special Effects_: Graham Longhurst  
_Monkey Effects_: David Allen, Roger Dicken  
_Additional Electronic Music/Effects_: David Lawson  
_Editor_: Pamela Power  
_Production Designer_: Brian Morris  
_Art Director_: Clinton Cavers  
_Art Director (New York)_: Vicky Paul  
_Set Decorator_: Ann Mollo  
_Set Decorator (New York)_: Janet Rosenbloom  
_Scenic Artist (New York)_: Beverly Miller  
_Costume Designer_: Milena Canonero  
_New York Costumer (Men)_: Al Crane  
_New York Costumer (Women)_: Beverly Cycon  
_Wardrobe Supervisor_: Brenda Dabbs  
_Wardrobe Master_: Kenny Crouch  
_Make-up Supervisors_: Jane Royle, Ann Brodie  
_Make-up (New York)_: Paul Gobel  
_Special Make-up_: Anthony Clavet  
_Make-up Illusions_: Dick Smith, Carl Fullerton  
_Opticals_: Peerless Camera Company  
_Music_: Michael Rubini, Denny Jaeger  
_Music Arranged and Supervised by_: Howard Blake  
_Sound Recording (New York)_: Dan Neroda  
_Sound Mixer_: Clive Winter  
_Sound Mixer (New York)_: John Bolz  
_Sound Re-recording_: Bill Rowe, Ray Merrin  
_Sound Editor_: Peter Pennell  
_Sound Effects Editor_: Campbell Askew  
_Special Assistant (Los Angeles)_: Angelo Pacifici  
_Studio_: Shepperton Studios

**Cast**  
Catherine Deneuve _(Miriam Blaylock)_  
David Bowie _(John Blaylock)_  
Susan Sarandon _(Sarah Roberts)_  
Cliff De Young _(Tom Haver)_  
Beth Ehlers _(Alice Cavender)_  
Dan Hedaya _(Lieutenant Allegrezza)_  
Rufus Collins _(Charlie Humphries)_  
Suzanne Bertish _(Phyllis)_  
James Aubrey _(Ron)_  
Ann Magnuson _(young woman from disco)_  
John Stephen Hill _(young man from disco)_  
Shane Rimmer _(Jelinek)_  
Bauhaus _(disco group)_  
Douglas Lambert _(TV host)_  
Bessie Love _(Lillybelle)_  
John Pankow _(phone booth youth 1)_  
Willem Dafoe _(phone booth youth 2)_  
Sophie Ward _(girl in London house)_  
Philip Sayer _(boy in London house)_  
Lise Hilboldt _(waiting room nurse)_  
Michael Howe _(intern 1)_  
Edward Wiley _(intern 2)_  
Richard Robles _(skater)_  
George Camiller _(Eumenes)_  
Oke Wambu _(Egyptian slave)_  
Kent Miller, Fred Yockers, Susan Hunter,  James Wassenich_,_ Allan Richards_,_ Hilary Six_,_ Carole-Ann Scott _(cadavers)_

USA 1983

97 mins
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTc4NjcxNzYwN119
-->