
Actor and singer Keala Settle (_The Greatest Showman_) introduces a film that has inspired her. Powell and Pressburger’s classic, loosely based on Hans Christian Andersen’s fairy tale, is hailed by directors including Scorsese, Spielberg and Coppola as one of the all-time greatest films. Filmed in glorious Technicolor, Shearer stars as a ballet dancer who joins a prestigious company and must decide between her career and her relationship with a young composer.

Keala Settle appears in _& Juliet_ at the Shaftesbury Theatre until Saturday 18 June.

**5 things to know about ‘The Red Shoes’**<br>
1. It’s a spectacular rejection of realism<br>
_The Red Shoes_, which premiered on 6 September 1948, followed a tremendous run of films by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger. Between 1943 and 1947, they made _The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp_, _A Canterbury Tale_, _‘I Know Where I’m Going!’_, _A Matter of Life and Death_ and _Black Narcissus_. For their next trick, they took a decisive step away from the tendency towards realism in postwar cinema, pushing the emotional expressiveness of Technicolor photography yet further, in collaboration with genius cinematographer Jack Cardiff.

Pressburger had originally worked on the idea for the film before the war. Producer Alexander Korda had hired him to write a script that combined the story of the dancer Nijinsky, and his time at Sergei Diaghilev’s Ballet Russes, with the Hans Christian Anderson fairytale about enchanted shoes that force the wearer to dance on and on until death. He’d also instructed Pressburger to write a role for Merle Oberon, but as that passion cooled, so did the producer’s interest in the film.

Powell and Pressburger returned to the idea in 1946, convinced its time had come: ‘We had all been told for 10 years to go out and die for freedom and democracy,’ Powell recalled. ‘Now the war was over, _The Red Shoes_ told us to go out and die for art.’

The gamble paid off eventually. While the initial release in Britain was very small, as the Rank Organisation resented the fact that it had gone wildly over budget, _The Red Shoes_ played for two years in New York – and was soon acclaimed a triumph.

2. It’s a dance film made by dancers<br>
While some ballet films use stand-ins and cutaways to make it appear that their actors have the right moves, Powell and Pressburger cast dancers instead. Moira Shearer, who plays the heroine, rising star Vicky Page, was a featured dancer at Sadler’s Wells. French prima ballerina Ludmilla Tchérina played one here too – the glamorous Boronskaya. Léonid Massine, former choreographer for Diaghilev’s Ballets Russes, played Grischa Ljubow, who so brutally coaches Page; while Robert Helpmann played the lead male dancer in the company, Ivan Boleslawsky, and also choreographed the astonishing extended ballet sequence.

Shearer proved an elegant and natural actress on camera – easily able to hold her own with co-stars Anton Walbrook as impresario Lermontov and Marius Goring as young composer Julian Craster. As for the other dancers, if their performances at times veer toward the high-key gestural style of ballet mime, then that all adds to the film’s heady, hyper-real excitement.

3. It’s inspired by one star… and created another<br>
The film’s scenario is said to have been inspired by the moment when Diaghilev saw 14-year-old Diana Gould in the premiere of Frederick Ashton’s ballet _Leda and the Swan_. He intended to hire her for his own company but died before that could happen. Anna Pavlova was similarly impressed by Gould, saying she was the only English dancer ‘who had a soul’, but she too died before they could work together.

One of Lermontov and Vicky’s early exchanges sets up both the film’s morbid obsession and its central question: what is life without art? Lermontov asks Vicky: ‘Why do you want to dance?’ Her ingenuous reply is: ‘Why do you want to live?’

In truth, there was probably more than a little of the Lermontov about director Michael Powell. His film made a star out of Shearer, as much as Lermontov’s ballet launches Vicky to fame. Shearer retired from ballet in 1953, but continued to act, becoming such a popular household name that her wedding to Ludovic Kennedy in 1950 was thronged by well-wishers – and she danced twice more for Powell, in 1951’s _The Tales of Hoffman_ and in 1960’s _Peeping Tom_.

4. It’s about the agony of artistic expression<br>
Lermontov chides Vicky: ‘Don’t forget, a great impression of simplicity can only be achieved by great agony of body and spirit.’ Few films reveal, either as cruelly or as eloquently as this one, the sacrifices that artists make. We see more bruising rehearsals than standing ovations, and yet, the Ballet Lermontov dances on.

Page’s final, anguished choice between love and art only makes tangible the decision that Lermontov clearly made long ago. Walbrook, who plays him so brilliantly, was gay, as was Diaghilev. Lermontov knows nothing of Page’s ‘charms’ and cares less, he says; his ‘family’ is his company, and he asserts that: ‘The dancer who relies on the comforts of human love will never be a great dancer. Never!’

As certain critics have noted, there is a striking gay subtext to _The Red Shoes_, but it is a tragic one – Lermontov is a lonely figure whose obsessive nature demonstrates the danger of living for art rather than love.

5. From Scorsese to _La La Land_, its influence lives on<br>
_The Red Shoes_ is one of the most widely influential movies of all time. Regularly hailed as a favourite in critics’ polls and by directors including Martin Scorsese (‘It’s one of the true miracles of film history’), Francis Ford Coppola, Steven Spielberg and Brian De Palma, it has also been reworked by artists outside the cinema. Kate Bush’s 1993 album _The Red Shoes_ was inspired by the film, for example. Coming full circle, Matthew Bourne choreographed the film as a ballet at Sadler’s Wells in 2017.

The film also has an afterlife in the classic Hollywood musical. Gene Kelly screened the film multiple times for the producers of _An American in Paris_ (1951), as he persuaded them to let him include a ballet sequence in the film. He did, and in the following year’s _Singin’ in the Rain_ too. The popularity of the ballet sequence as a genre trope was underlined when Damien Chazelle included one in his pastiche _La La Land_ (2016).

There are several, pointed, references to the film in a very different musical, the 1985 Broadway adaptation _A Chorus Line_. That’s not a direct cinematic influence but rather a testament to the film’s impact on generations of girls. The book for that musical was based on interviews with New York dancers, several of whom confided that _The Red Shoes_ inspired their choice of career.

In a 1970 interview with _The_ _New York Times_, Shearer expressed a little self-deprecating regret on this score: ‘I’m a bit embarrassed whenever I hear how many girls were influenced by it. The dancing in it wasn’t terribly good.’<br>
**Pamela Hutchinson, bfi.org.uk, 6 September 2018**<br>

**THE RED SHOES**<br>
_The Entire Production Directed, Produced and Written by:_ Michael Powell, Emeric Pressburger
_©:_ Independent Producers
_A production of_ The Archers _presented_ by J. Arthur Rank _released through_ General Film Distributors
_Assistant Producer:_ George R. Busby
_Assistant Director:_ Sydney S. Streeter
_Continuity:_ Doreen North
_Additional Dialogue by:_ Keith Winter
_From an Original Screenplay by:_ Emeric Pressburger
_Based on the story by:_ Hans Christian Andersen
_Director of Photography:_ Jack Cardiff
_Colour Control:_ Natalie Kalmus
_Associate:_ Joan Bridge
_Camera Operator:_ Christopher Challis
_Technicolor Composite Photography:_ F. George Gunn, E. Hague
_Editor:_ Reginald Mills
_Liaison Editor:_ John Seabourne Jr
_Production Designed by:_ Hein Heckroth
_Art Director:_ Arthur Lawson
_Special Paintings:_ Ivor Beddoes, Józef Natanson
_Scenic Artist:_ Alfred Roberts
_Miss Shearer’s Dresses by:_ Jacques Fath of Paris, Mattli of London
_Mlle Tchérina’s Dresses by:_ Carven of Paris
_Wardrobe:_ Dorothy Edwards
_Music Composed Arranged and Conducted by:_ Brian Easdale
_Music [Played by]:_ The Royal Philharmonic Orchestra
_Music [Aria Sung by]:_ Margherita Grandi
_Music [of Café de Paris Sequence]:_ Ted Heath’s Kenny Baker Swing Group
_The Ballet of the Red Shoes Orchestra Conducted by:_ Sir Thomas Beecham Bart
_Music Recorder:_ Ted Drake
_The Ballet of the Red Shoes Choreography by:_ Robert Helpmann
_Part of the Shoemaker Created/Danced by:_ Leonide Massine

_Assistant Maître de Ballet:_ Alan Carter

_Assistant Maîtresse de Ballet:_ Joan Harris

_Sound:_ Charles Poulton

_Sound System:_ Western Electric

_Dubbing:_ Gordon MacCullum

_Made at_:  D&P Studios, Pinewood Studios

_uncredited_

_Production Assistant:_ Gwladys Jenks

_Production Secretary:_ Marjorie Mein

_2nd Assistant Director:_ Kenneth Rick

_3rd Assistant Directors:_ J.M. Gibson,

Lawrence G. Knight

_Assistant Continuity:_ Joanna Busby

_Focus Puller:_ George Minassian

_Clapper Loaders:_ Bob Kindred, John Morgan

_Stills:_ George Cannon

_Assistant Stills:_ Alistair Phillips

_Special Stills:_ Cornel Lucas

_Assistant Editor:_ Noreen Ackland

_2nd Assistant Editors:_ Tony Haynes, Lawrence G. Knight

_Assistant Art Director:_ Elven Webb

_Draughtsmen:_ Don Picton, Vic Wilkins, V. Shaw, Alan Withy, G. Heavens, Bernard Goodwin

_Wardrobe:_ Elsie Withers

_Masks:_ Terence Morgan II

_Make-up Supervisor:_ Ernie Gasser

_Make-up:_ Eric Carter

_Boom Operator:_ Al Burton

_Dubbing Editor:_ Leonard Trumm

**Cast**

Anton Walbrook _(Boris Lermontov)_

Marius Goring _(Julian Craster)_

Moira Shearer _(Victoria Page)_

Robert Helpmann _(Ivan Boleslawsky)_

Leonide Massine _(Grischa Ljubov)_

Albert Basserman _(Ratov)_

Ludmilla Tcherina _(Irina Boronskaja)_

Esmond Knight _(Livingstone ‘Livy’ Montague)_

Jean Short _(Terry)_

Gordon Littmann _(Ike)_

Julia Lang _(a balletomane)_

Bill Shine _(a balletomane’s mate)_

Austin Trevor _(Professor Palmer)_

Eric Berry _(Dimitri)_

Irene Browne _(Lady Neston)_

Jerry Verno _(George, stage-door keeper)_

Derek Elphinstone _(Lord Oldham)_

Madame Rambert _(herself)_

Joy Rawlins _(Gwladys, Vicky’s friend)_

Marcel Poncin _(M. Boudin)_

Michel Bazalgette _(M. Rideaut)_

Yvonne Andre _(Vicky’s dresser)_

Hay Petrie _(Boisson)_

Alan Carter, Joan Harris _(solo dancers)_

Joan Sheldon, Paula Dunning, Brian Ashbridge, Denis Carey,

Lynne Dorval, Helen Ffrance, Robert Dorning, Eddie Gaillard,

Paul Hammond, Tommy Linden, Trisha Linova, Anna Marinova,

Guy Massey, John Regan, Peggy Sager, Ruth Sendler

_(dancers in ‘The Ballet of The Red Shoes’)_

Hilda Gaunt _(accompanist)_

_uncredited_

Richard George _(doorman)_

Peggy Sager, Audrey Harman

UK 1948©

133 mins
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTM4Njk3MDAxMl19
-->