<![endif]-->

On paper, Michael Mann’s feature debut _Thief_ is nothing groundbreaking, fit to be consigned to that vague category of ‘neo-noir’. Certainly the basic materials of the plot – the hood looking for a last big score before he goes straight – are older than _High Sierra_ (1941).

_Thief_’s protagonist Frank (James Caan, 41 years old here) spent his youth in Joliet Prison. He’s only been back on the street for a few years but he’s already acquired an ex-wife, alimony payments, a car dealership and a bar – all cover for his real money-making career, that of a professional safecracker. Despite his unconventional upbringing and lifestyle, Frank wants the ‘regular-type life’, to quote Mann’s _Heat_ (1995). Frank’s vision of the future is a dream of middle-class normalcy that’s literally right out of glossy magazines: he carries around a collage of wife, kids and a big suburban house that he put together back in prison. In a whirlwind courtship that’s urgent, over-assertive and utterly sincere, Frank recruits a diner cashier, Jessie (Tuesday Weld), to be his wife. He is ludicrously to-the-point and matter-of-fact. As Caan points out, he doesn’t use one contraction while playing Frank, who says what he means once, clearly, and to be understood.

Largely shot on the streets, alleys and industrial fringes of Mann’s hometown Chicago, _Thief_ is grounded in authenticity and first-hand knowhow – a solid relationship to the physical facts of the world that was then the hallmark of American action films. The dialogue is criminal argot and shop talk, the characters drawn from Chicagoland lore, police blotters and direct experience. Mann conceived of the character of Frank, a man who has spent his formative years as a ward of the state and comes out desperate to make up for lost time, when he was working with Folsom Prison inmates on an earlier project, the 1979 TV movie  
_The Jericho Mile_. Real-life Chicago Police Department detective sergeant Chuck Adamson plays one of the plainclothes cops trying to shake Frank down for a cut of his scores, alongside John Santucci, the professional burglar who acted as the film’s ‘technical adviser’. Santucci later appeared in the Mann-produced television shows _Miami Vice_ and the Adamson-created _Crime Story_ – although he returned to his first love after the acting gigs dried up. (Another Mann discovery, Dennis Farina, appears as a thug enforcer in _Thief_, though he was still on the force during filming.)

‘You couldn’t grow up on a farm and play this guy,’ Mann says of casting Queens-raised Caan as Frank. ‘You had to have grown up in the city.’ Caan cribbed his Chicago accent from Mann and learnt how to handle a .45 from a CIA trainer, while Santucci and his crew taught him how to pick locks. The centrepiece heist, which has Frank and his guys using a thermal lance to cut through a wholesale diamond dealer’s safe, was filmed at Zoetrope Studios with a documentary-like scrutiny of process, using a real safe and real tools, exactly as it would have been done on-site by a crew. ‘There were no props on the film,’ Mann says. ‘If you picked up a lock pull, that lock pull had been on scores. Alarm bypasses were alarm bypasses, they’d taken down scores. Half the guns we used had been used.’

_Thief_ is 100 per cent legit – but that’s only one aspect of the movie. The successful heist is followed immediately by Frank and Jessie cavorting in the Pacific surf as a fade-in of polyphonic synths, provided by the West Berlin-based electronic group Tangerine Dream, builds to a triumphal stride. The side-by-side proximity of these two scenes shows the two poles that, in an uneasy synthesis, make up Mann’s style: a hard pragmatism and a rather florid romanticism.

_Thief_ was Tangerine Dream’s second movie score, their first having been for William Friedkin’s 1977 _Sorcerer_, a film resplendent in apocalyptic masculinity.  
Like Mann, Friedkin is a native of Chicago, home of Hemingway, City of Broad Shoulders – and one of the main incubators of the conception of American machismo as it was popularly defined in the 20th century. In _Thief_, Mann buys into and perpetuates that Hemingway idea of self-possessed, grimly determined, can-do manhood, with its unbreakable personal codes and sullen pride, but he complicates it as he does so.

With his documentary impulse and emphasis on capturing process, Mann was in line with the American action film’s traditional orientation towards realism, but he welded this to a presentational approach more usually associated with, say, Japanese cinema. In the blue-collar actioner, overt stylisation was regarded as suspect and sissifed, something to be consigned to the musical comedy. But those walls had slowly been eroding: Scorsese’s enquiries into male pathology, for example, were conducted under the influence of Minnelli and Michael Powell’s razzle-dazzle. Along with Japanophile Paul Schrader’s _American Gigolo_, released the previous year – and of course the launch of MTV, to which _Thief_’s appearance was almost exactly contemporary – Mann’s film exemplified a sea change in how style was accepted in American popular culture.

In _Thief_, Mann’s style appears more or less fully formed – he gravitates to neon like a moth to a flame and revels in complex, multipart crane shots (through the sign in Frank’s car dealership, alongside and in front of a Des Moines-bound bus on the freeway). The basic precepts of Mann’s personal philosophy are also in place. ‘I am self-employed,’ Frank tells the deceptively grandfatherly syndicate boss Leo (Robert Prosky) who tries to hire him. ‘I am doing fine. I don’t deal with egos, I am Joe the boss of my own body. So what the fuck do I have to work for you for?’ From here it is a very short hop to Mann’s 1992 _Last of the Mohicans_ and Daniel Day-Lewis’s Leatherstocking rebuffing a British recruiter’s question: ‘You call yourself a patriot, and loyal subject to the crown?’ ‘I don’t call myself subject to much at all.’ All of which is in line with the credo of self-reliance that can be found in much American action filmmaking, from the works of Howard Hawks to those of Mann’s fellow Chicagoan Don Siegel, in whose _Charley Varrick_ (1973) the protagonist bills himself as ‘The Last of the Independents’. And if the bad press surrounding the release of Mann’s most recent films – 2006’s _Miami Vice_ and 2009’s _Public Enemies_ – is to be taken as any indication, this isn’t just posturing. Caan describes Mann, with his 18-hour shooting days, as a ‘workaholic’ and ‘a loon’, and the number of people pulling for the director to fail with each new project suggests that he’s made his share of enemies. ‘There’s ways of doing things that round off the corners,’ says Adamson’s detective after laying into Frank in an interrogation room, sounding like nothing so much as a pleading producer.

Earlier I mentioned the ‘uneasy synthesis’ at the centre of Mann’s style, between pragmatism and romanticism (which just happen to be the two major strains of Native American philosophy). This volatile mixture isn’t a weakness but rather a natural outgrowth of Mann’s subject matter, a tension reflected within the films. Time and again Mann deals with the incompatibility of balancing professional dedication and affairs of the heart. Attachments of any kind, as irresistible as they may be, are also a liability, something that can be used as leverage against you.  
At the close of _Thief_, we see Frank destroy every asset that he has, both emotional and financial. He is enacting the formula for survival that is memorably outlined in _Heat_: ‘Don’t let yourself get attached to anything you are not willing to walk out on in 30 seconds flat if you feel the heat around the corner.’

Mann shares this monastic prescription for survival with his contemporary Walter Hill, but where Hill maintains a cool, stoic surface marked by quiet ruefulness, Mann’s films erupt with passion and pulsating longing. The final eruption in _Thief_, however, is purely retributive, a scorched-earth settling of scores that ends with the last of those crane-shot flourishes. It’s the last word on a first film that announces clearly, and to be understood: ‘I am not here to play around.’

Nick Pinkerton, _Sight & Sound_, April 2014


<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTIxMDMxMDE3NV19
-->