

_+ Q&A with actor Jim Broadbent and producer Nicky Bentham_

Based on real events, The Duke is set in 1961 when Kempton Bunton (Broadbent), a 60-year-old taxi driver, stole Goya’s portrait of the Duke of Wellington from the National Gallery in London – the first (and only) theft in the gallery’s history. Kempton sent ransom notes saying that he’d return the painting if the government provided free TV to the elderly – only 50 years later did the full story emerge. The passing of Roger Michell in September 2021 saw a huge outpouring of grief from the industry, who admired his work in film,  TV and theatre; work such as _The Buddha of Suburbia_, _Notting Hill_ and _Enduring Love_.

Before the screening we’ll be joined by producer Kevin Loader and writer  
Hanif Kureishi who’ll discuss Michell’s work and legacy, and post-screening we’re joined by those who worked with Michell on _The Duke_.

**Production Story**  
2021 marked the 60th anniversary of the theft of Goya’s portrait of The Duke of Wellington from the National Gallery in London. It is the only painting ever to have been stolen from the National Gallery in its 196-year history.

_The Duke_ is the first film to tell this extraordinary true story. At its heart is Kempton Bunton, one of life’s great eccentrics, a man of principle who stood up for what he believed to be right and was determined to live a meaningful life.

The process of bringing the incredible Bunton family history to the screen started with an email to the producer, Nicky Bentham, from Kempton’s grandson (Jackie’s son), Christopher Bunton. He told her of the story of his grandfather and his interest in turning it into a film.

‘It felt too good to be true,’ Bentham recalls, ‘so I started researching and going deeper into the story. When everything Christopher said checked out, I was astonished that this story hadn’t been told before. The family rarely spoke about it themselves, so I felt incredibly privileged when they gave me access to all their archive materials, ranging from copies of Kempton’s extraordinary stage plays to the hand-tinted photograph of Marian [_Kempton and Dorothy’s oldest child who died in a cycling accident_] which used to have pride of place on the wall of the family home.’

With the rights in the story secured, Bentham started to consider who would be the right partner to bring the story to screen.

‘Thinking about the type of story, I knew Pathé would be a great partner,’ Bentham explains. ‘They were the first phone call I made and were interested immediately. Like me, they couldn’t believe this true story hadn’t been told already.’

‘We have a reputation for quality dramas based on inspiring true stories’ says Cameron McCracken, Executive Producer and Managing Director of Pathe UK, ‘so I was delighted when Nicky made a beeline to our door. Kempton’s belief that we are all connected – that in caring for the weakest, we are also caring for ourselves – that belief resonated with me when we first started developing the project with Nicky. And of course, that resonance only grew stronger as we found ourselves completing the film in the middle of the COVID crisis.’

Over time, both Ingenious Media and Screen Yorkshire became equally enthused by the story and joined Pathé and Neon as partners on the production.

The celebrated stage play writers, Richard Bean and Clive Coleman, were brought on board to write the script. As research material, Bentham was able to provide them with all of Kempton’s plays:

‘He was always writing about things that were very close to his heart, things that he couldn’t talk about freely at home, so he poured it all into his writing,’ Bentham explains. ‘While none of his plays have ever been published, you can see a lot of his character coming through in the writing. It is something that Richard and Clive used as inspiration to find the right tone for Kempton’s voice: his humour and his humanity.’

As a former barrister and correspondent for the BBC on legal affairs, Coleman was aware of the true story through his admiration for Kempton’s, QC Jeremy Hutchinson. However, as the writers explain further, what attracted them to the project, was not the trial:

‘For us, the real charm of the film lies in Kempton. A character who genuinely believes, in the face of reality telling him otherwise, that he can change the world and change people’s behaviour for the better,’ Coleman explains. ‘He never loses that faith which has been deeply rooted in him since childhood.’

‘Our take on the film is that it is very much a story of a family and the forces that are pulling them apart, rooted in the tragic death of Marian,’ Bean adds. ‘You also have the character of Kempton, one of those fabulous British characters, who is trying to change the world. He is a modern Robin Hood, a Don Quixote, a dreamer in a way.’

When the script was sent to Roger Michell, the director was immediately smitten.

‘Clive and Richard did a marvellous job in finding the equilibrium between fun and fact. The script read like a great Ealing Comedy from the 1960s,’ Michell recalls, ‘the type of films that were being made during the period our story is set; political films about ordinary people telling truth to power and standing up to government. Much like the Ealing Comedies, the script had a wonderful tone, it was light-hearted, but with moments of pathos and drama, as well as being full of laughs. It’s an uplifting film, you’ll leave the cinema with a big smile on your face – I hope!’

‘It’s a feel-good film and I hope audiences will feel uplifted,’ Coleman agrees. ‘It’s about the kind of person you would want to be around. In a world that often does feel so bleak, there are people who genuinely have hope and genuinely believe that they can change things for the better. If there were more people like Kempton Bunton, the world would be a happier place.’  
**Production notes**
<br><br>

**THE DUKE**  
_Directed by_: Roger Michell  
©: Pathé Productions Limited  
_A_ Neon Films _production_  
_For_: Pathé, Great Bison Productions,  Screen Yorkshire  
_Executive Producers_: Cameron McCracken,  Jenny Borgars, Andrea Scarso, Hugo Heppell, Peter Scarf, Christopher Bunton  
_Produced by_: Nicky Bentham  
_Co-producer_: Michael Constable  
_Production Manager_: Filiz-Theres Erel  
_Production Co-ordinator_: Cecily Colahan  
_Location Manager (Yorkshire)_: Matt Bowden  
_Location Manager (London)_: James Player  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Louise Seymour  
_1st Assistant Director_: Simon Hedges  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Gemma Nunn  
_Casting by_: Fiona Weir  
_Written by_: Richard Bean, Clive Coleman  
_Director of Photography_: Mike Eley  
_1st Assistant Camera_: Oliver Driscoll  
_2nd Assistant Camera_: Ben Jones  
_Gaffer_: Paul McGeachan  
_Key Grip_: Sergio Bernuzzi  
_Visual Effects by_: Automatik VFX Ltd  
_Additional Visual Effects by_: Invisible Arts Collective  
_Special Effects Supervisor_: Rob Rowley  
_Film Editor_: Kristina Hetherington  
_1st Assistant Editor_: Andrew Jadavji  
_Production Designer_: Kristian Milsted  
_Supervising Art Director_: Adam Tomlinson  
_Art Director_: Liz Simpson  
_Prop Master_: P.R. Smith  
_Construction Manager_: Robert Charlton  
_Costume Designer_: Dinah Collin  
_Costume Supervisor_: Filipa Fabrica  
_Hair & Make-up Designer_: Karen Hartley Thomas  
_Hair & Make-up Artists_: Amy Riley, Emma Rigby, Natalie Young  
_Music by_: George Fenton  
_Sound Supervisor_: Danny Sheehan  
_Production Sound Mixer_: Martin Beresford  
_Re-recording Mixers_: Paul Carter, Jamie Roden  
_Sound Editing by_: Phaze UK  
_Sound Editors_: Rob Prynne, Rob Turner  
_Dialogue Editor_: Matt Davies  
_Dialect Coaches_: Jill McCullough,  Helen Jane Simmons

**Cast**  
Jim Broadbent _(Kempton Bunton)_  
Helen Mirren _(Dorothy Bunton)_  
Fionn Whitehead _(Jackie Bunton)_  
Anna Maxwell Martin _(Mrs Gowling)_  
Matthew Goode _(Jeremy Hutchinson QC)_  
Jack Bandeira _(Kenny Bunton)_  
Aimée Kelly _(Irene Boslover)_  
Charlotte Spencer _(Pammy)_  
Heather Craney _(Debbie, clerk of the court)_  
Stephen Rashbrook _(foreman)_  
James Wilby _(Judge Aarvold)_  
John Heffernan _(Neddie Cussen)_  
Alice Stokoe _(woman with babe)_  
Sarah Annett _(post office clerk)_  
Charlie Richmond _(PO official 1)_  
Matt Sutton _(PO official 2)_  
Michael Hodgson _(Barry Spence)_  
Richard McCabe _(Rab Butler)_  
Andrew Havill _(Sir Philip Hendy)_  
Sarah Beck Mather _(press woman)_  
Cliff Burnett _(Wilf)_  
Val McLane _(Freda)_  
Will Graham _(office worker)_  
Claire Lams _(BBC receptionist)_  
Matthew Steer _(passing BBC manager)_  
Sarah Cotton _(Express receptionist)_  
Michael Gould _(Express editor)_  
Charles Edwards _(Sir Joseph Simpson)_  
Sparrow Michell _(Agnes Gowling)_  
Sian Clifford _(Dr Unsworth)_  
Sam Swainsbury _(DI Brompton)_  
Dorian Lough _(DI Macpherson)_  
Joseph Bowler _(factory worker)_  
Ashley Kumar _(Javid Akram)_  
Craig Conway _(Mr Walker)_  
Austin Haynes _(scruffy little boy)_  
Michael Mather _(Eddie)_  
Sammy T. Dobson _(bakery assistant)_  
Michael Adams _(PC Inverdale)_  
Simon Hubbard _(PC Myton)_  
Andy Parker _(Goya)_  
Darren Charman _(Duke of Wellington)_  
Sharon Facinelli _(bar lady)_  
Neal Barry _(gallery security guard)_  
Joshua McGuire _(Eric Crowther)_  
Steve Giles _(Mr Edbury)_

UK 2020©  
95 mins

Courtesy of Pathé
<br><br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNzIzNDgwODU1XX0=
-->