

After the heart attack that interrupted filming on _The Home and the World_, Satyajit Ray completed only three more films before his death. His Ibsen adaptation, _An Enemy of the People_, was disappointingly cramped and stiff, and _Branches of the Tree_, though more fluid in execution, felt weighed down by its sombre musings on the corruption poisoning Indian society. But fears of an irreversible creative decline are gratifyingly dispelled by his final film. _Agantuk_ is a wise, witty and benevolent work, a worthy sign-off from a great filmmaker.

Aptly enough for a farewell performance, _Agantuk_ features what looks very like a slyly mocking self-portrait. Manmohan (an engaging, urbane portrayal from Utpal Dutt) shares many of Ray’s attributes: the taste for jokes, word-games and the play of ideas, the sceptical eye for the blessings of civilisation and the immediate rapport with children, delighting young Satyaki and his friends with foreign coins, astronomy, and accounts of Machu Picchu. True, Manmohan has spent most of his life abroad, whereas Ray never quit his native Bengal. But it’s Manmohan’s cosmopolitan stance that makes him an object of suspicion, and throughout his career Ray was accused in some quarters of making films for foreign audiences, of not being a true Indian filmmaker.

But if _Agantuk_ was conceived as a valedictory film, there’s nothing in the least solemn about it. Ray’s ironic humour suffuses the action, and there are scenes as funny as any in his output – as when two friends, the actor Ranjan and his wife Chhanda, are invited to meet the maybe-uncle. Quivering with curiosity, Ranjan (played by Rabi Ghosh, a Ray regular since the 1962 _Abhijan_) commits ever clumsier gaffes the more he strives to be tactful – to Anila’s alarm and Manmohan’s growing amusement. Here as throughout the film, the satire is tolerant. Even the offensive lawyer Sen Gupta is seen as more blinkered than malicious, and Sudhindra’s suspicion and parsimony (not only may Manhoman be a fake, he moans, but he’s costing 50 rupees a day in food) are no more than gently mocked.

You can’t hope to reach the core of the person, Manmohan observes, ‘by peeling the onion’. _Agantuk_ is a warning against certainty, against easy and complacent assumptions. Nobody and nothing is truly knowable, and that part of the world that calls itself civilised doesn’t by any means have all the answers. But civilisation can’t simply be unlearned, sloughed off at will: ‘Marx. Freud. Tagore are in my blood,’ Manmohan regretfully admits. ‘You can’t just bring yourself to act like a savage.’ Even so, Ray suggests, every contact with other perceptions can be a source of joy and enrichment: watching Anila join in the tribal dance, Manmohan murmurs, ‘I had doubts whether she was really my niece. Now I know.’ It’s not only the stranger whose genuineness has been under test.

The end of Ray’s last film takes us back to his starting points. The small Bengali village, where boys play around a giant banyan tree, recalls the world of the young Apu, and nearby Santiniketan where Sital Sarkar lives is also where in the early 40s Ray attended Tagore’s pastoral university, the ‘Abode of Peace’ (Ray’s mentor, Renoir, sprinkled similar personal references into his own final film, _Le Petit théâtre de Jean Renoir_). After this, it’s hard not to see Manmohan Mitra’s final gesture as Ray’s own legacy, leaving us with the rich inheritance of his films, and of the humanist tradition he himself inherited from Tagore. The stranger’s surname was certainly not chosen at random: Mitra, in Hindu mythology, is the god of harmony, the creative principle that brings reconciliation and understanding.  
**Philip Kemp, _Sight and Sound_, September 1993**
<br><br>

**THE STRANGER (AGANTUK)**  
_Directed by_: Satyajit Ray  
_Production Company_:  National Film Development Corporation,  Erato Films, D.D. Films, Soprofilms  
_With the participation of_: Canal+  
_Executive Producers_: Gérard Depardieu,  Daniel Toscan du Plantier  
_Producer_: Satyajit Ray  
_Production Supervisor_: Anil Chowdhury  
_Assistant Directors_: Ramesh Sen, Subrata Lahiri, Ramen Chatterjee  
_Written by_: Satyajit Ray  
_Director of Photography_: Barun Raha  
_Camera Operator_: Sandip Ray  
_Editor_: Dulal Dutta  
_Production Design_: Ashoke Bose  
_Costume Design_: Lalita Ray  
_Make-up Artist_: Ananta Das  
_Music_: Satyajit Ray  
_Songs_: S. Bannerjee  
_Music Arranger_: Aloke Dey  
_Sound Recording_: Sujit Sarkar  
_Sound Re-recording_: Hitendra Ghosh

**Cast**  
Deepankar Dey _(Sudhindra Bose)_  
Mamata Shankar _(Anila Bose)_  
Bikram Bhattacharya _(Satyaki/Bablu)_  
Utpal Dutt _(Manmohan Mitra)_  
Dhritiman Chatterjee _(Prithwish Sen Gupta)_  
Rabi Ghosh _(Ranjan Rakshit)_  
Subrata Chatterjee _(Chhanda Rakshit)_  
Promode Ganguly _(Tridib Mukherjee)_  
Ajit Banerjee _(Sital Sarkar)_

India/France 1991  
120 mins

Print courtesy of the Packard Humanities Institute Collection at the Academy Film Archive<br>
<br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMjEyNzQ4OTQxOF19
-->