
<![endif]-->

_+ intro by film historian Mark Newell_

The Aldwych farce was born 100 years ago, sparking a hugely successful series of British stage comedies and, with the advent of sound, launching the film careers of its stars. _All In!_ features founding farceur Ralph Lynn as the monocled hero who acquires a wrestling club while trying to appease his prudish aunt. But the plot is not the thing – it’s the knockabout comedy and Lynn’s humorous dithering through a string of difficulties that generate the fun. Look out for legendary TV director Joan Kemp-Welch in a small role.

**bfi.org.uk**

**A contemporary review**

Slapstick sporting farce. Archie Scott, a well-meaning but foolish young man, who has been brought up by his maiden aunt Genesta, is left a racing stable. Aunt Genesta decides that it shall be turned into a holiday home for working girls. Archie goes to the stables and meets Kay, who is helping train his horse ‘The Taint’ for the Derby. Calling to collect a debt at an all-in wrestling stadium he is cheated by the owner into buying it. Archie finds his new possession distinctly embarrassing. How he deals with it, and is dealt with by it, how he loses the Derby but finds romance, and how his financial difficulties are smoothed out, make up a farce in which the movement is swift, the gags amusing and well put over, and the climax hilarious slapstick.

The direction is thoroughly efficient. The most in the way of laughs is got out of every situation, and none is unduly prolonged. With so much that is in its own way thoroughly entertaining, it is to be regretted that there are one or two less satisfactory elements. The dialogue is in the main bright and amusing, but there are a number of quite unnecessary _Doubles entendres_. The burlesquing of parish workers is so extravagant as to be quite remote from reality, but the placing of two clergymen, ‘a Dean and his curate,’ in a thoroughly undignified and ridiculous situation is in doubtful taste. The acting reaches a high level. Ralph Lynn has a part after his own heart; he is in his element, and thoroughly amusing in his own particular way. Sydney Fairbrother has not a great deal to do but does it skilfully. Gina Malo makes an attractive Kay and Claude Dampier gives a characteristic performance. The technical qualities are of a very high order.

**_Monthly Film Bulletin_****, November 1936**

**Claude Deputises**

Comedy short featuring Claude Dampier as a hapless pianist.

  

**CLAUDE DEPUTISES – A COMEDY INTERLUDE**

_Directed by_: R.E. Jeffrey  
_Presented by_: British International Pictures  
_Distributed by_: Wardour Films  
_Photography by_: E. Palmer  
_Sound Recordist_: C.H. Monks  
_Recorded by the_: RCA Photophone  
_Made and Recorded at_: Elstree Studios  

**Cast**  
Claude Dampier _(the pianist)_  
Billy Carlyle _(Miss Carlyle)_  

UK 1930  
11 mins  

**ALL IN!**  
_Directed by_: Marcel Varnel  
_A_ Gainsborough _Picture_  
_Presented by_: Gaumont-British Picture Corporation  
_Controlled by_: Gaumont British Distributors Ltd.  
_Producer_: Michael Balcon *  
_Screen Play and Dialogue_: Leslie Arliss, Val Guest  
_Additional Dialogue_: Bernard Merivale  
_Adapted from_ Tattenham Corner _by_: Brandon Fleming, Bernard Merivale  
_Photography_: Arthur Crabtree  
_Editing_: Alfred Roome  
_Art Direction_: Vetchinsky  
_Musical Direction_: Louis Levy  
_Sound Recording_: W. Salter  
_Sound System_: British Acoustic Film  
_Studio_: Gainsborough Studios  

**Cast**  
Ralph Lynn _(Archie Slott)_  
Sydney Fairbrother _(Genesta Slott)_  
Robert Nainby _(Eustace Slott)_  
Gina Malo _(Kay Toop)_  
Claude Dampier _(Samuel Toop)_  
Gibb McLaughlin _(Reverend Cuppleditch)_  
Graham Brown _(Sir James Santor)_  
Joan Kemp-Welch _(Agnes Santor)_  
O.B. Clarence _(Hemingway)_  
Jack Barty _(Ting-a-ling Tom)_  
Garry Marsh _(John Lillywhite)_  
Glennis Lorimer _(Kitty)_  
Fewlass Lewellyn _(Dean of Plinge)_  
Jack Pye, Jan Gotch, Bob Gregory, Rough-House King Curtis, Mike Sullivan, Legs Langevin, Chopper Sims, Leo Wax _(all-in wrestlers)_  
Graham Moffatt _(boy on slot machine) *_  
Edgar Driver _(Blenkinsop) *_  

UK 1936  
71 mins  

* Uncredited  

A BFI National Archive print  
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE0NTQwNjYxOTEsNzMwOTk4MTE2XX0=
-->