

A key movie from the _movida madrileña_, the explosion of countercultural creativity that erupted in Spain in the years following the death of Franco, Iván Zulueta’s second film is a radical, unpredictable journey to the wild side. Horror film director José (Eusebio Poncela) receives a mysterious parcel containing an audio tape, a reel of film and a key; coupled with the reappearance of his heroin-addicted ex-girlfriend (Cecilia Roth), this sparks off memories of two sinister encounters he had with Pedro (Will More), an eccentric Super 8 fanatic obsessed by the idea of achieving rapture (_arrebato_) through film.

Sometimes camp, often unnerving, with an arrestingly untamed performance by More, _Arrebato_ is a sensational trip that alternates between obsessive adoration for and thrilled fear of cinema. While the film is occasionally messy, and the leaps back and forth through time are deliberately disorienting, it has some phenomenal sequences, and every scene with More is riveting.  
A moment when a film camera suddenly moves of its own accord judders the film into another realm, and Zulueta makes great use of the eerie appearance of projected flickering Super 8 film stock. Made just four years after Franco’s death, the film embraces new freedoms. Sex, nudity, queerness, copious drug use (mainly heroin) feature prominently. There is little explicit political commentary, although one tense scene towards the end, involving a blindfold, evokes the decades of dictatorship.

_Arrebato_ is one of the favourite films of Pedro Almodóvar – the best-known director associated with the _movida_ – who, in a typically weird choice by Zulueta, dubs one of the female characters. Many of the actors would appear in Almodóvar’s films throughout the 1980s, while Zulueta, who never directed another feature, went on to design the posters for Almodóvar’s _Labyrinth of Passions_ (1982) and _Dark Habits_ (1983).  
**Alex Davidson, _Sight and Sound_, April 2022**

**Pedro Almodóvar on Iván Zulueta**  
How to begin? I met Iván in Madrid when I had been living there for almost ten years. He was already known and admired for his work in television – that mythical series _Último grito_ (_The Latest Craze_) – as well as _Un dos tres al escondite inglés_ (_One Two Three What’s the Time Mr Wolf_) – a feature film credited to its producer José Luis Borau because Iván did not have the director’s union card – and one of the few examples of pop cinema made in our country at the end of the 1960s that was not shabby, that could stand comparison with any product of English psychedelia in terms of quality, albeit outdoing their irony, of course. Fans of _Arrebato_ may not know this, but Iván Zulueta was a person with a great sense of humour.

We hit it off immediately; we were bound together by psychedelia, the American undergrounds, the earliest English pop, some friends in common, some enemies in common too, the new wave music being made in Madrid, Glam, comics, Cecilia Roth, an absolute hunger for cinema, and the fact that we were both shooting small films in Super 8. He was much better than me.  
I was a beginner with the camera when Iván was already an absolute virtuoso in his use of this instrument.

_Arrebato_ (1979), his second work, a filmic testament right from the beginning of the shoot, wouldn’t be anything without the thousands of metres that Iván filmed in Super 8 throughout the previous years. Not for nothing was it the Super 8 camera (like the 16mm camera of Michael Powell’s _Peeping Tom_, although with a different meaning) that enraptures the prostrate and expectant bodies of the protagonists Will More and Eusebio Poncela, that ushers them to a better, or non-world. The only information the film gives us is that this non-world is a sort of void of reddish colour.

It is difficult to speak about Iván Zulueta and death.

It is very difficult to speak about his latter years, those immediately after _Arrebato_, when he was retired in San Sebastián, like Norma Desmond, but with all of his senses intact, and without having relinquished one iota of his exquisite sensitivity. Spanish cinema has lost one of its most original filmmakers, and together with Erice, the one that managed to give his images the greatest aesthetic meaning. He never filmed a single banal image. The element in which he felt most comfortable was abstraction. The pure image, brimful of meanings but freed from the burden of fiction, always cushioned on a rich variety of soundscapes. David Lynch, but less shadowy and more pop. Psychedelia was his school, and he made genuine masterpieces in this style.

His work as a graphic designer and draftsman was inextricably linked to his cinematographic work. From the end of the 70s to the mid 80s he designed many wonderful film posters. I remember how impressed I was with the one for _Furtivos_ (_Poachers_, 1975) and how much fun we had whilst he was designing the one for _Entre Tinieblas_ (_Dark Habits_, 1983) or _Laberinto de pasiones_ (_Labyrinth of Passions_, 1982). Even if he seems an ephemeral figure  
(I hope he doesn’t), Iván Zulueta bequeaths an incredibly rich and essential legacy to the history of Spanish cinema, in minor formats but possessed of extraordinary greatness. _Arrebato_ reverberates with the same force as it did 30 years ago, the year it opened.

Spanish cinema loses a unique individual, and José Luis Borau his best disciple. I remember those days in his flat in Plaza de España in Madrid so clearly. Everything was charged with life, and we used to laugh so much!

Pedro Almodóvar, 2009. Translated by Mar Diestro-Dópido for _Sight and Sound_

<![endif]-->

**ARREBATO**

_Directed by_: Iván Zulueta  
_Presented by_:  
Nicolás Astiarraga Producciones Cinematográficas  
_Executive Producer_: Augusto M. Torres  
_Produced by_: Nicolás Astiárraga  
_Production Manager_: Miguel Ángel Bermejo  
_Production Assistant_: Tito Goyanes  
_Assistant Directors_: Eduardo Eznarriaga,  
Carlos Astiárraga  
_Script Supervisor_: María Eugenia Cuesta  
_Written by_: Iván Zulueta  
_Director of Photography_: Ángel Luis Fernández  
_Assistant Camera_: Fátima Ochando  
_Gaffer_: Rafael García Martos  
_Key Grip_: Antonio Martinez Roque  
_Editor_: José Luis Pelaez  
_1st Assistant Editor_: Maria Elena Sainz De Pozas  
_2nd Assistant Editor_: José Perez Luna  
_Costumes_: José Alberto Urbieta  
_Make-up_: José Alberto Urbieta  
_Laboratory_: S.A. Fotofilm Madrid  
_Music_: Negativo  
_Sound Recordist_: Miguel Polo  
_Boom Operator_: Francisco Femenía  
_Re-recording Mixer_: Francisco Peramos  
_Camera Equipment_: S.A. Camararent Internacional

_Cast:_

Eusebio Poncela _(José Sirgado)_  
Cecilia Roth _(Ana Turner)_  
Will More _(Pedro P.)_  
Marta Fernández Muro _(Marta)_  
Helena Fernán-Gómez _(Gloria)_  
Carmen Giralt _(Tía Carmen)_  
Max Madera _(hustler)_  
Javi Ulacia _(photo shop employee)_  
Rosa Crespo _(vampire)_  
Luis Ciges _(porter)_  
Antonio Gasset _(assembler)_ *  
Pedro Almodóvar _(voice of Gloria)_ *

Spain 1979

105 mins

* Uncredited

The screening on Wed 14 Dec will be introduced  
by writer and broadcaster Anna Bogutskaya
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTY2MzU4MDIyNF19
-->