
It’s 2002, three years after the events of the original film, and national stability is threatened when Tokyo is placed under martial law amid tensions between the Japanese armed forces and police. Riffing on real domestic and international issues in Japan’s recent history, _Patlabor 2_ is a thrilling, critically applauded piece that builds on the original’s inspiring mecha-sensibility with even more enthralling visuals.<br>
**bfi.org.uk**<br>

‘These days anyone can be a god ... But God is impotent,’ warns a Deep Throat figure railing against the postmodem world that frames much of the highly politicised _Patlabor 2_. The _Patlabor_ franchise is a true multimedia package, spanning a comic, video series and television show. Set largely in a near-future Tokyo, its story involves giant robots placed in realistic situations where funding cuts are a greater danger than invading aliens. Director Mamoru Oshii later made _Ghost in the Shell_ and the live-action _Avalon_. But _Patlabor_ was itself a team effort – the creators collectively called themselves Headgear – a fact perhaps reflected in the ensemble of wide-eyed youngsters, reserved superiors and eccentrics who people it.

Though still underpinned by Oshii’s icy intellectualism, the _Patlabor_ movies have more humour and humanity than _Ghost in the Shell_. The first, which features a dead man’s plan to bring down modem Tokyo’s techno-sphere, contains much reminiscing on the city’s past and the revelation that its high-rise skyline has become a weapon. The story is clear but the abrupt shifts between police procedural, high-tech action, character business and Oshii’s philosophising make it feel like a blend of different television episodes.

The superior _Patlabor 2_ is more thematically ambitious, with Tokyo’s police and army thrown into chaos by terrorist attacks. Again it’s suggested that the enemy may have the moral high ground: one sequence, told through melancholy images of bruise-coloured clouds and Tokyo’s bleakly functional infrastructure, openly condemns Japan’s reliance on US realpolitik, and the film later suggests that America is waiting to return Japan to its post-1945 Occupation days. As in _Ghost in the Shell_, much of the rhetoric is spoken over still pictures or barely animated faces, but these are balanced by startlingly beautiful images such as the armed soldiers reflected in a Tokyo fashion-store window, or the blue-toned, snow-speckled night where the heroine meets enemies – or is that champions? – of the state.<br>
**Andrew Osmond, _Sight & Sound_, August 2003**<br>

**PATLABOR 2 (KIDÔ KEISATSU PATOREBÂ: THE MOVIE 2)**<br>
_Director:_ Mamoru Oshii<br>
_Executive Producers:_ Tetsu Uemura, Makoto Yamashina<br>
_Producers:_ Rod Boaz, Tsuyoshi Hamawatari, Mitsuhisa Ishikawa, Shin Unozawa<br>
_Screenplay:_ Kazunori Itô<br>
_Character Designers:_ Akemi Takada, Masami Yûki<br>
_Mechanical Designer:_ Shôji Kawamori<br>
_Set Decorator:_ Satoshi Kon<br>
_Composer:_ Kenji Kawai<br>

**Voice Cast**<br>
Mîna Tominaga _(Noa Izumi)_<br>
Toshio Furukawa _(Asuma Shinohara)_<br>
Ryûnosuke Ôbayashi _(Captain Kiichi Gotoh)_<br>
Yoshiko Sakakibara _(Deputy Section Chief Shinobu Nagumo)_<br>
Michihiro Ikemizu _(Isao Oota)_<br>
Issei Futamata _(Mikiyasu Shinshi)_<br>
Daisuke Gôri _(Hiromi Yamazaki)_<br>
Shigeru Chiba _(Shigeo ‘Shige’ Shiba)_<br>

Japan 1993<br>
114 mins<br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE2MzAyODMzMDldfQ==
-->