
_Natural Born Killers_ follows married couple Mickey (Harrelson) and Mallory (Lewis) across the desert of New Mexico as they embark on an endless killing spree, and in the process become media stars. Unsurprisingly controversial at the time, _Natural Born Killers_ is a powerful viewing experience and remains an accomplished and innovative piece of cinema that will keep you talking about it long after the credits have rolled.<br>
**bfi.org.uk**

Having completed his Vietnam trilogy with the turgid and perfunctory _Heaven and Earth_ (1993), a far more classical film centred on the true-life story of a Vietnamese woman, the wife of a traumatised veteran, and her construction of a business empire over in the US, Stone returned to formal excess with his hugely controversial and exciting 1994 film _Natural Born Killers_.

Based on a story and script by Quentin Tarantino, the film has historically been approached superficially as a moralistic and grandstanding piece about the detrimental, desensitising impact of TV entertainment, pop culture and violent movies. Indeed, it developed into something of a self-fulfilling prophecy when the film became the centre of controversy and fierce debate around the ethics of screen violence and the potentially harmful impact on viewers in the 1990s. The UK went so far as to halt its home entertainment distribution for some years.

If the idea of violent art – and, in particular, violent art engaged in its own playful discourse around violence in art – falling foul of a climate of narrow-minded censoriousness and priggish moralising seems very familiar right about now, then it speaks as much to Stone’s prescience as a filmmaker and the enduring resonance of his work as it does to history repeating itself.

_Natural Born Killers_ also endures because of its sense of freshness and experimentation with regard to viewer sensation. With the film’s visual and sonic language – an onslaught of mixed media, animation, frenetic cutting, bizarre abstraction and in-camera effects, coupled with a thunderously loud sound design and rock score – so clearly intended to approximate its central characters’ fractured, damaged subjectivity and warped behaviour, Stone’s control of form is undeniable, in spite, or rather because of the mania of the film style. It is also a remarkably funny and entertaining film, showcasing thrillingly excessive performances from the likes of Robert Downey Jr and Tommy Lee Jones in supporting roles, and of course the superb coupling of Woody Harrelson and Juliette Lewis as the young killers Mickey and Mallory.<br>
**Paul Ridd, bfi.org.uk, 28 August 2019**

I don’t know of a movie that has made me more ambivalent, more undecided and more uncertain in my reaction than _Natural Born Killers_. As an experience for the average viewer, the blood-stained road-movie story of Mickey and Mallory is numbingly familiar, the satirical attacks on media and prisons pedestrian and all too easy. As actual filmmaking, the visuals of the film are rushed, awkward. There is no ‘viewpoint’ towards the killer-protagonists consistently and intelligibly assembled, and so the usual defensive arguments – that the film exploits the issues about violence it purportedly deals with – have some measure of truth. By almost every regular criterion _Natural Born Killers_ is a failure as a work of art. Yet it is the film released by Hollywood in 1994 that most deserves serious support, respect and admiration. Oliver Stone, without entirely knowing how or why, went for it. He dared to put his deepest rage on screen. All of us who live and work in Hollywood stand abashed, first at how he manoeuvred himself into a position to do it, and second at how far he was willing to go; what he was willing to risk, what he was willing to question.

How can a film be ‘bad’ in the ways listed above, and be ‘important’ and necessary in other ways? It’s confounding. It reveals contradictions within the very framework of how we try to talk about films. But this is the film’s ‘importance’. _Natural Born Killers_ is one of the few Hollywood films that forces us to come to it, after a while, on its terms.

Everyone knows the imitation _Badlands/Bonnie and Clyde/Gun Crazy_ plot of _NBK_ by now, that is unless they haven’t cared about Hollywood action cinema of the last three decades. Everyone knows that Stone pasted onto the basic situation a kind of Zolaesque allegory in the third act, where the punk killers Mickey and Mallory inspire a bloody prison revolt thereby acting out what TV is Doing To American Society. What five minutes of _NBK_ tells us is that accounts of the stories and the characters’ psychologies, these conventional ways of describing a movie, are all beside the point. Every attempt to describe this film, or admire it, in naturalistic vocabulary, or to explore the sensations that the garish rapid montage sequences produce, also misses the mark. _NBK_ is not a meaningful disquisition on the impulse to be violent, nor is it an analysis of the role that media plays in making us more violent. Rather _NBK_ is a film about film. It is Oliver Stone duelling with the recent history of the movie image. It is an attempt to look at how an ‘image culture’ has taken over from immediate experience. Violence is a secondary symptom of a primary disease, the sheer pollution of representational imagery.

Stone’s decisive energy and will to subvert are directed against the Hollywood deal itself, the unholy pact between commercial cinema’s practices, and the audience’s jaded appetites. The film demands that the audience question all regular modes of identification, and all reality of character and situation. This is done as resolutely as anything by Bresson or late Godard or experimentalists like Stan Brakhage and Michael Snow. A brief exposure to Stone’s aggressive montage style tells us that we’re not in Kansas anymore. We’re in a radically disjunctive universe where image, action, and sensation are divorced from the narrative armature of cause and effect.

_NBK_ begins with a detailed shot-by-shot reconstruction of the opening sequence from _Henry: Portrait of a Serial Killer_; it ends with the phrase ‘Let’s make some music, Colorado,’ thereby invoking _Rio Bravo_, one of Tarantino’s favourite action movies. All of _NBK_ is freighted with and at war with Hollywood action cinema. (Stone’s own films such as _Scarface_ – which he scripted – and _Platoon_ are even invoked as part of the sea of visual shit.) What Stone wants somehow to do is slough off his Hollywood identity with this movie. He wants, in some deeply tormented way, to annihilate the shell of Hollywood norms that have heretofore controlled his own and everyone else’s careers. This is an aspiration that everyone who works in Hollywood understands: the desire to make a film about characters who are not palatable, to deal with emotions and situations that cannot be resolved positively, to leave the regular, three act, psychologically motivated story structure behind and finally, if you follow the logic, to question the whole of conventional representation.<br>
**Larry Gross, _Sight and Sound_, March 1995**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTI0NjQwNTU0N119
-->