

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

In this early hit from horror master Guillermo del Toro, an elderly antiques dealer Jesús Gris (Luppi) finds an ancient gold scarab that punctures his hand and draws blood. It’s not long before Jesús feels reinvigorated: his hair grows thicker, his skin looks more youthful, and he has a heightened sexual appetite. He also develops an insatiable taste for blood, which gradually overcomes him. Del Toro’s feature debut is a startling take on a familiar sub-genre that heralded the arrival of a major horror visionary.  
**Kelli Weston, bfi.org.uk**  

**A contemporary review**  
Turning away from the erotics of vampiric desire, _Cronos_ rather surveys need, a banal thirst for blood which reaches its extraordinary climax with Jesus licking up blood from the floor of a men’s toilet on New Year’s Eve. ‘I am Jesús Gris,’ he announces. The names have to be translated for this film to really work for an English-speaking public: ‘I am Grey Jesus.’ _Cronos_ tells the story of how the main character comes to embody his name, and die (so that she – Jesús’s granddaughter Aurora –may live). It is a film about the ruin of Jesús’s body.

The young Mexican director Guillermo del Toro has insisted on how important Catholicism is to his story of ordinary vampirism (addiction). Thus, rather than merely falling into sentimentalism, the end of _Cronos_ arguably remains faithful to the structure of the plot on which it is modelled – the death and resurrection of Christ revealing the melodramatic dimension of the central story of Christian religion. The twist in the tale is that the symbolically cannibalistic relationship to Christ practised in Catholic liturgy is here pressed into the service of del Toro’s film about a now vampiric Jesús (is vampirism to cannibalism what soup is to the main meal?) . In this sense, del Toro’s ‘copy’ interestingly transforms our relationship to the ‘original’.

The connections between cinema and religion are well-known, but rarely have they been presented so pointedly in film – although this has always been an important dimension of the vampire genre, most recently in Coppola’s version of _Bram Stoker’s Dracula_. This is where the character of the young Aurora becomes so important, and not merely as a symbol of future hope or the object of Jesús’ desire. Aurora is an onlooker: she stands by, witnessing the action of the film and the transformation of her grandfather. More than anything else, Aurora looks on, mesmerised and hardly comprehending what she sees. From this point of view, she stands in for the viewer, infantilising his or her gaze. And as a potential ‘blood donor’, she also represents the colour – red – that Jesús’s white body lacks: when he finally dies, and gives himself up to the light, his white skin is confused with the screen with which the film ends. If Jesús represents religion, Aurora might represent the cinema – and its most important colour, as both Godard and Polanski know very well. From the point of view of _Cronos_, and vampire films in general, film is essentially red and white, not black and white. It is this aspect of the cinematic experience – childish and religious – that cultural critics like Adorno warned against (and which filmmakers like Spielberg market).

As is evident, like many contemporary films, _Cronos_ is a film about film. It also, however, tells a movingly simple story about ageing, the yearning for more time, the fragility of the body and addiction. It quotes Cronenberg’s study of addiction, _Videodrome_ – as Jesús inserts his hand under his grey skin before peeling it off – but its slightly lighter, humorous tone for some reason recalls another film about obsession, Patrice Leconte’s _The Hairdresser’s Husband_. The film’s simple story line and slowed-down pace already distance it from the production values of conventional genre movies: it feels like an art-house film. More important, however, is the melancholic humour which Federico Luppi, who plays Jesús, displays towards this obsession with youth. In _Cronos_, however, this humour is eventually pushed to macabre extremes as the now resurrected Jesús, dressed up for his funeral, wanders the city streets with his black suit, white shirt and tie on back-to-front – as if his head had been twisted around (perhaps by Aurora) one hundred and eighty degrees: Jesus, un-dead and fragile, becomes a scruffy doll.

In this sense, _Cronos_ remains a genre film, and like most vampire and horror movies from the American continent, it exhibits both the concerns of a postcolonial present unreconciled with the past (has the Cronos device been made from Aztec gold melted down by the Conquistadors? Is it Aztec sacrifice rather than Catholic ritual that makes its claim on Jesús?) and the perceived fragility of the body in a technologically changing world in which the machine-human interface is seen as increasingly blurred. The Cronos device is some kind of pre-industrial cyborg experiment gone horribly wrong.  
**John Kraniauskas, _Sight and Sound_, October 1994**  

**CRONOS**  
_Director:_ Guillermo del Toro  
_Production Companies:_ Iguana Producciones, Ventana Films, IMCINE, University of Guadalajara  
_Producers:_ Berta Navarro, Arthur H. Gorson  
_Co-producers:_ Alejandro Springall, Bernard L. Nussbaumer  
_Associate Producers:_ Rafael Cruz, Jorge Sánchez, Julio Solorzano Foppa  
_Production Administrator:_ Lourdes Pérez Nido  
_Production Co-ordinators:_ Sachiko Uzeta, Yvette Brestyanszky,
Sunil Perkash  
_Location Manager:_ Pablo Buelna  
_Assistant Directors:_ Sebastián Silva, Joaquín Silva, Andrés Ortega  
_Continuity:_ Mariana Gironella, Valentina Leduc  
_Screenplay:_ Guillermo del Toro  
_Director of Photography:_ Guillermo Navarro  
_Special Effects:_ Laurencio Cordero
_Graphics:_ Ria Lewerke
_Editor:_ Raúl Dávalos
_Associate Editor:_ Paul O’Bryan
_Production Designer:_ Tolita Figueroa
_Art Director:_ Brigitte Broch
_Art Designer:_ Maria Figueroa
_Art Co-ordinator:_ Terry Fernandez
_Costumes:_ Genoveva Petitpierre
_Wardrobe Supervisor:_ Federico Castillo
_Make-up:_ M. Carrajal, Julieta Napoles
_Special Make-up Effects:_ Necropia
_Hairstylist:_ Julieta Napoles
_Titles/Opticals:_ Mercer Titles and Optical Effects
_Music:_ Javier Alvarez
_Music Supervisor:_ Steven Soles
_Music Producer:_ Ian Dearden
_Music Editor:_ Kevin Kern
_Choreography:_ Esther Soler
_Sound Manager:_ Matthias Ehrenberg
_Sound Supervisors:_ Claudia Becker, Marissa Iglesias
_Sound:_ Fernando Cámara
_Dubbing Mixer:_ John F. Reiner
_Sound Re-recordists:_ David E. Fluhr, George R. Grooves, John B. Asman _Supervising Sound Editor:_ Burton M. Weinstein
_Foley Artists:_ Dean P. Minnedy, Robert Muchnicki
_Foley Mixer:_ Paul Aronoff
_Dubbing:_ Miguel de Luna, Nerio Barberis
_Stunt Co-ordinator:_ Gerardo Moreno
_Narrator:_ Jorge Martinez De Hoyos

**Cast**
Federico Luppi _(Jesús Gris)_
Ron Perlman _(Angel de la Guardia)_
Claudio Brook _(Dieter de la Guardia)_
Margarita Isabel _(Mercedes Gris)_
Tamara Shanath _(Aurora Gris)_
Daniel Giménez Cacho _(Tito)_
Mario Iván Martínez _(Fulcanelli, the_ _alchemist)_
Juan Carlos Columbo _(funeral director)_
Farnesio de Bernal _(Manuelito)_
Luis Rodriguez _(buyer)_
Javier Alvarez _(bleeding man)_
Gerardo Moscoso _(drunk)_

Eugenio Lobo _(stoned man)_
Adriana Olivera, Clementina Rojas, Tzinia Salgado, Luis de Icaza,
Jorge Bolada, Ignacio Raiz Oviedo _(tango students)_
Francisco Sánchez _(Mimo)_
Laurencio Cordero _(watchman)_

Mexico 1993
94 mins
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEwNjgwOTUxMDQsLTE4OTU3MDE4MjRdfQ
==
-->