

‘Stevie Smith is the lady in the corner of Twentieth Century verse in English, the one with the ghastly floral hat and knitting. Only when you look closer do you notice that those flowers are real and still growing and that what you took for knitting needles are actually daggers,’ wrote Robert Nyle.

Poet and novelist, Stevie Smith, lived in the middle class suburb of Palmers Green in North London most of her life and died at the age of 68 in 1971. She became the third woman to receive the Queen’s Gold Medal for Poetry in 1969, joining such prestigious company as John Betjeman, Siegfried Sassoon, and W. H. Auden. Her loyal following extends not only across the Atlantic, but also to young people more than a generation removed from her own.

Glenda Jackson, who poignantly reveals the significance of Stevie’s life and writings through her portrayal, identifies strongly with the extraordinary woman she calls ‘one of the greatest writers we’ve got’: ‘One of the interesting things I found from doing it (the play) was how so few had actually seen beneath the exterior of her as this rather mousy, shy, strange little lady – they saw her as being somehow rather fey. In fact, I think she was extremely tough.’

‘I mean,’ Glenda explained, ‘she was a very brave woman, I think, with a great deal of spirit and an extremely critical mind. She didn’t miss anything. She didn’t miss anything about people and the truths about most people’s lives: that most people don’t live in a maelstrom of enormous emotional conflicts, in fact, and that the real drama of life is lived out on a really minute scale ... it’s just the minutiae of life that create the dramas and tensions. I think she captured that very well.’

‘We like to think that tragedy is reserved for a few great people,’ continues Glenda, ‘that tragedy only occurs in great circumstances. It’s not true, of course, and I think that in view of how people live seemingly quiet, dull, unruffled lives, she absolutely blows up and out of the window. She was a very, very revolutionary woman, actually ... she had a very revolutionary view of society, she didn’t take it all as read by any means.’

‘Her attitude to authority, for instance: she has a very sceptical view of authority,’ Glenda says. ‘Her attitude to religion: she was I think, a deeply religious woman but she was deeply religious on the level of saying, “Well, if you _are_ God, prove it.” She absolutely discounted the social attitudes of her time. She simply didn’t take, even though there would seem to be nothing in her background to make her fight against it, the idea of woman’s greatest fulfilment being within the home and with children.’

Writer Hugh Whitemore, who first conceived the idea of writing a play on Stevie Smith, then translated her ethereal qualities to the screen, thinks the key to her tremendous appeal lies in the sense of identification she awakens in all types of people. ‘She rings all sorts of bells,’ he says. ‘She is a kind of everywoman – very much of a common figure. A lot of her poems are about things we all think about – love and death and getting old, being anxious and looking back at childhood. She really wrote about things we all know – which is what makes her so accessible.’

Glenda Jackson was writer Hugh Whitemore’s first choice for the key role. ‘First of all,’ he says, ‘I think Stevie is very tough. She had no illusions really. She’s a very decisive writer and I think it needed someone who is a very “gutsy” and decisive actress. Occasionally Stevie is sentimental and I think it needs someone to play against this, otherwise it would become very gluey.’

When Robert Enders of Bowden Productions first saw the Hugh Whitemore play _Stevie_ and felt it could be translated into a great film, he was reacting with the instincts of a man who is geared to the cinema. He saw in it certain cinematic values that could be developed far beyond the limitations of the theatre stage. In the months that followed, through the writing of the screenplay by Whitemore and the many discussions on treatment and techniques to be used, to the actual directing of the film by Enders himself, he felt he had witnessed a complete rebirth of _Stevie_ that was a long way from being a mere reproduction of the play.

The popular phrase used of such a transition is ‘opening out’; however, it is also ‘opened in’ or inwards. In the theatre you have simply one image, in this case a room with two people, but the power of the camera is such that opening in or closing in can be just as effective and cinematic as its opposite. ‘Take the Hitchcock version of _Rope_,’ says Whitemore, ‘which stayed largely within one room. Yet nobody could be more cinematic than Hitchcock, moving his camera to examine faces, props and objects: the whole focus and balance changes in a way that is only possible in the cinema.’

Using both techniques then – opening out and opening in, the film is able to show us visually and in great detail and clarity the sort of life Stevie Smith led. Both Enders and Whitemore felt that an arbitrary ‘opening out’, a naive and pointless showing of trees and meadows, was of no value since a room can be just as cinematic as a landscape. Where landscape has been used it is to add cinematic comment as when The Man (played by Trevor Howard) speaks the lines of her most famous poem, ‘Not waving, but drowning’, against the cold, ice-covered background of the great lake in Grovelands Park. Again, the camera is used to recreate more vividly the images of loneliness and isolation and death that ran through her childhood: the funeral of her mother with all the pomp and ceremony of a bygone era when Stevie was still a child tells far more of her loss and desolation than words – however well used – in the play  
on stage.

The ‘opening in’ or ‘closing in’ of the film brings its own very specific rewards in that one is enabled to see and savour detail of performance in a way that was never possible on stage. Talking to Glenda Jackson in the central part of Stevie, Hugh Whitemore says, ‘The closer you get to her, the more riveting she is. To watch her act closely is something audiences in the theatre can’t do.  I would think she must be, today, the best screen actress in the world. Certainly the most experienced, with performances of such merit and such variety.’ An opinion endorsed by director Robert Enders and noted cinematographer Freddie Young, who found her performance unique  and extraordinary.

Side by side, and indeed, interwoven with this performance is that of  Mona Washbourne as the ‘Lion Aunt’. The marvellous warmth of tenderness and feeling between Stevie and her aunt throughout the film – the aunt gradually becoming a rather cantankerous old lady, so frail that it is now Stevie’s turn to look after her. By ‘closing in’ on film, every nuance of that love – compounded or argument and agreement, humour and sadness – becomes closer and more touching.  
**Production notes**
<br><br>

**STEVIE**  
_Directed by_: Robert Enders  
©: First Artists Production Company Ltd.,  Grand Metropolitan (Finance) Ltd.  
_A_ Bowden _production_  
_A presentation of_: First Artists, Grand Metropolitan  
_Distributed by_: First Artists Releasing Inc.  
_Produced by_: Robert Enders  
_Production Manager_: John Wilcox  
_Production Accountant_: Hazel Crombie  
_Production Secretary_: Caroline Neame  
_Assistant Director_: Ken Baker  
_2nd Assistant Director_: Philip Black  
_Continuity_: Marjorie Lavelly  
_Screenplay based on his play by_: Hugh Whitmore  
_Screenplay based on the works of_: Stevie Smith  
_Director of Photography_: Freddie Young  
_Camera Operator_: Chic Anstiss  
_Gaffer_: Pat Noonan  
_Camera Grip_: Dickie Lee  
_Stills Photographer_: Ray Hearne *  
_Editor_: Peter Tanner  
_Assistant Editor_: Michael Connell  
_Art Director_: Robert Jones  
_Set Decorator_: John Lageu  
_Costume Designer_: John Gunter  
_Wardrobe Supervisor_: Babs Gray  
_Make-up Artist_: Dickie Mills  
_Hairdresser_: Joan Carpenter  
_Titles by_: G.S.E. Ltd  
_Colour by_: Technicolor  
_Music Composed by_: Patrick Gowers  
_Guitar Soloist_: John Williams  
_Music Performed by_: Gabrieli String Quartet  
_Double Bass_: Rodney Slatford  
_[Music] Conducted by_: Marcus Dods  
_Sound Mixer_: Claude Hitchcock  
_Dubbing Mixer_: Ken Scrivener  
_Sound Editor_: Jeanne Henderson  
_Publicity_: Lily Poyser *  
_Lenses and Panaflex Camera by_: Panavision  
_Made at_: EMI Elstree Studios

**Cast**  
Glenda Jackson _(Stevie Smith)_  
Mona Washbourne _(aunt)_  
Alec McCowen _(Freddy)_  
Trevor Howard _(the man)_  
Emma Louise Fox _(Stevie as child)_

USA-UK 1978©  
102 mins

*Uncredited
<br><br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTExNzc4MjMwMTVdfQ==
-->