**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.<br>

**What’s it about?**<br>
Young Billy lives in a South Yorkshire mining community where he endures harsh treatment at home and at school. His life changes for the better, however, when he starts looking after a young kestrel and ultimately finds a skill that he’s interested in pursuing. _Kes_, both funny and bleak, is an uncompromising look at unlocking potential, and a true classic from one of the UK’s finest directors.<br>

**The kestrel in ‘Kes’**<br>
‘We never thought of the kestrel as a symbol,’ Ken Loach claimed in _Loach on Loach_. But it is impossible to watch the British filmmaker’s humanist 1969 tale – of how the limited horizons of teenager Billy Casper are briefly opened when he trains a kestrel – and think of the falcon as anything but a symbol of freedom. While the fate of many working-class boys like Billy lies underground in one of Barnsley’s collieries, his kestrel demonstrates her mastery of the sky, soaring and swooping high above.

It’s said that the eagle is the raptor of the emperor, the peregrine that of the prince, while the smaller, more abundant kestrel is ‘used by persons of a lower rank’, according to J.E. Harting in _The Ornithology of Shakespeare_ (1871). Hence the title of Barry Hines’s book, on which _Kes_ was based: _A Kestrel for a Knave_. Harting even suggests its name could derive from ‘coystril’, meaning knave or peasant. While Kes doesn’t feature in the film as much as the title suggests, she gets her close-up when Billy shows her to his teacher, and it’s impossible not to share his reverence for this small chestnut-brown assassin.

Richard, Barry’s brother, a self-taught teen falconer, inspired the novel and trained the three kestrels that performed in the film – Freeman, Hardy and Willis (Hardy proved the most competent and willing actor). One of the three birds was even plucked from the same nest hole in Tankersley Old Hall that’s seen in the film.

_Kes_ came at a time of renewed concern for falcons and the environment, with J.A. Baker’s _The Peregrine_ and Rachel Carson’s _Silent Spring_ recently published. _Kes_ reportedly sparked a craze for training kestrels (Richard Hines tells in his autobiography how he rescued one caught on an electricity pole by its leash). But since 1970 UK kestrel numbers have fallen 44 per cent, due to urbanisation and pesticides.

After the film’s success, Disney asked to adapt Hines’s novel, but wanted Kes to survive at the end. Hines declined the rights. Many readers may be happy to know that Freeman, Hardy and Willis were hacked back to the wild, just as Richard’s kestrel, the original Kes who inspired the book and the film, was.<br>
**Isabel Stevens, _Sight and Sound_, September 2021**<br>


**KES**<br>
_Director:_ Kenneth Loach<br>
_©:_ Woodfall Films Ltd<br>
_A_ Kestrel Films _production_<br>
_Released Through:_ United Artists<br>
_Presented by:_ Woodfall Films
_Producer:_ Tony Garnett
_Production Supervisor:_ David Griffith
_Assistant Director:_ Keith Evans
_Continuity:_ Penny Eyles
_Adaptation:_ Barry Hines, Kenneth Loach, Tony Garnett
_Based on the novel_ Kestrel for a Knave _by:_ Barry Hines
_Director of Photography:_ Chris Menges
_Lighting:_ Lee Electric (Lighting)
_Editor:_ Roy Watts
_Art Director:_ William McCrow
_Wardrobe:_ Daphne Dare
_Music Composed/Conducted by:_ John Cameron
_Sound Recording:_ Tony Jackson, Gerry Humphries
_Sound Recorded at:_ Twickenham Film Studios
_Sound Editor:_ Peter Pierce
_This film was also made by:_ Peter Allchorne, David Clarke, Michael English, Arthur Evans, Paddy Holman, John Matthews, Michael Messenger, Eddie Price, Franco Rosso, Nicola Webber, Michael Barnett, Harry Daly, Jane Harris, Sean Hudson, Robert Matthews, Ray Orton, Edward Riley, Fred Ruff, Eric Wicks, Harry Bell, Jim Duffy, Terry Lewis, Mike McDuffie, Bert Payne, Anne Robinson, John Williams, Tony Woodcock<br>

_uncredited_<br>
_Technical Adviser:_ Richard Hines<br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTYzOTk0MDczMV19
-->