
The adventure-filled journey of Simba, a heroic young lion struggling to find his place in nature’s ‘circle of life’ and follow in the regal paw prints of his father, the great King Mufasa, forms the basis of Walt Disney Pictures’ extraordinary animated feature, _The Lion King_. Set against the breathtaking natural beauty, mysticism and diversity of the African landscape, captured and stylised here by a team of top artistic talents, Disney’s 32nd full-length animated film is a uniquely entertaining coming-of-age allegory and the studio’s first to be based on an original story. Using classic storytelling elements, personable characters, memorable music, generous doses of humour and universal themes as building blocks, the film’s creative team meticulously and painstakingly crafted the story instead of the more traditional approach of adapting a classic fairy tale or literary favourite.

With superb performances from Disney’s talented animation team and an inspired all-star vocal ensemble, five incredible new songs by legendary singer/songwriter Elton John and Academy Award-winning lyricist Tim Rice (_Aladdin_) plus composer Hans Zimmer’s evocative score and musical supervision, this stylish, ambitious and magical film provides a delightfully entertaining experience for moviegoers of all ages. Innovative uses of technology add to the production’s scope and richness, allowing the filmmakers to once again expand the boundaries of their medium by creating images and situations that were never before possible.

_The Lion King_ follows the epic adventures of a young lion cub named Simba as he struggles to accept the responsibilities of adulthood and his destined role as king of the jungle. As a carefree cub, he ‘just can’t wait to be king’, and spends his days frolicking with his pal, Nala. His father, King Mufasa, the revered ruler of Pride Rock and the lands that surround it, teaches him about the ‘circle of life’ – the delicate balance of nature which bonds all animals together – and cautions him to prepare for the day when he will be called upon to lead. Mufasa’s evil brother, Scar, hopes that day will never arrive and schemes to do away with the king and Simba so that he can assume the throne for his own tyrannical purposes. He and his hyena henchmen – Shenzi, Banzai and Ed – lure Simba into the path of a wildebeest stampede in which Mufasa is killed trying to save his son.

Scar convinces Simba that he is responsible for his father’s death and urges him to run far away from the Pride Lands and never return. A frightened and guilt-ridden Simba flees into exile where he is befriended by a wacky but warm-hearted warthog named Pumbaa and his freewheeling meerkat companion, Timon. Under the dubious guidance of this nature’s odd couple, Simba adopts their ‘Hakuna Matata’ (no worries) attitude towards life, living on a diet of bugs and taking things one day at a time. The cub matures into a young adult and is able to put his past behind him until a beautiful young lioness, who turns out to be his childhood friend Nala, arrives on the scene. She tells him of the hard times and suffering that have come to the Pride Lands under Scar’s reign and beseeches him to take his place as king. With the help of Rafiki, a wise shaman baboon, Simba realises that his father’s spirit lives on in him and that he must accept the responsibility of his destined role. In a climactic battle with his uncle and an army of hyenas, Simba attempts to reclaim his rightful place in the ‘circle of life’.

‘_The Lion King_ is very much in the great Disney tradition of using allegories with animals for storytelling purposes,’ says Roy E. Disney, vice chairman of The Walt Disney Company and head of feature animation. ‘In the early days, Walt adapted many of Aesop’s fables for animation and used animal characters like Mickey and Donald to tell his stories. Later _Bambi_, _Lady and the Tramp_ and _One Hundred and One Dalmatians_, and some of the _True Life Adventures_ further explored the approach of telling stories about animals in human terms and with strong moral themes. I think _Lion_ _King_ very much has its roots in those films and I am personally delighted because it opens up whole new worlds for us in storytelling.’

According to Peter Schneider, president of feature animation and one of the principal architects of that division’s unprecedented expansion, ‘_The_ _Lion_ _King_ is a departure for us, thematically. It tackles a new area and a new subject and pushes the boundaries one step further both technically and artistically. Our animators are like a resident repertory theatre company and the quality of the performances in this film reflects the fact that with each film they are getting better and better as actors and artists. Part of our continuing challenge in feature animation is to convince moviegoers that animated movies are movies that happen to be animated. They have great stories, great emotion and great humour.’

‘_The Lion King_ is essentially a love story between a father and a son,’ says producer Don Hahn. ‘It’s about that moment in life when you realise that your father is going to pass on to you his wisdom and knowledge. The circle of life. Someday we all become adults. The baton will be passed on to us and we’re going to have to grow up.’

For Jeffrey Katzenberg, who, as chairman of The Walt Disney Studios, has taken a deep interest and creative role in the animated features, _The_ _Lion_ _King_ was a heartfelt project that touched a deep chord. ‘This movie is about responsibility,’ he says. ‘It’s about the responsibility we have as torchbearers from one generation to the next. For every single human being, there is a special moment when they go from being a child to an adult and must take on the responsibility that goes with it. For most people, it happens out of something joyous like finding a mate in life or the birth of a child. Sometimes, as in the case of Simba, it is caused by something tragic. He has to come to terms with that and ends up growing in the process. Whether you’re 5 or 85, it is something everyone can relate to instinctively or through personal experience.’

To prepare the filmmakers for the daunting task of capturing the vast natural beauty of Africa in animation, six members of the creative team visited Eastern Africa during the early stages of production. For each of them, the trip had a profound impact and helped them create and design the exciting visuals that make this film so special and unique. Close encounters with real lions and other jungle animals helped shape and define the roles the characters would play in the film. The numerous sketches, photos and videos they brought back with them enabled art director Andy Gaskill and production designer Chris Sanders to add authentic flavour to the reality-based ‘fantasy Africa’ they were creating for the film. The unforgettable images of fiery sunrises, velvety-blue nights, dusty gorges, lush green jungles and the earthtone colours of the Serengeti were all inspired by this trip and the natural beauty that abounds there.

For the more than 600 artists, animators and technicians who contributed to _The Lion King_ over its lengthy production schedule, the film presented many challenges. In the end, more than one million drawings were created for the film, which is made up of 1,197 hand-painted backgrounds and 119,058 individually coloured frames of film.  
**Production notes**
<br><br>

**LEND A PAW**<br>
_Director:_ Clyde Geronimi<br>
USA 1941<br>
8 mins<br>

**THE LION KING**<br>
_Directors_: Roger Allers, Rob Minkoff<br>
_Production Company_: Walt Disney Pictures<br>
_Executive Producer_: Thomas Schumacher, Sarah McArthur<br>
_Producer_: Don Hahn<br>
_Associate Producer_: Alice Dewey<br>
_Production Manager_: Dana Axelrod<br>
_Production Co-ordinators: Animation/Effects_:  Matt Garbera; _Clean-up_: Jeanie Lynd Sorenson; S_cene Planning_: Annamarie Costa, John Cunningham, Tom Baker, Mary Lescher<br>
_Post production manager_: Sara Duran<br>
_Artistic Supervisors: Story_: Brenda Chapman; _Layout_: Dan St. Pierre; _Background_: Doug Ball; _Clean-up_: Vera Lanpher; _Visual Effects_: Scott Santoro; _CGI_: Scott F. Johnston<br>
_Casting_: Brian Chavanne<br>
_ADR Voice Casting_: Barbara Harris<br>
_Screenplay_: Irene Mecchi, Jonathan Roberts,  Linda Woolverton<br>
_Story_: Burny Mattinson, Barry Johnson, Lorna Cook, Thom Enriquez, Andy Gaskill, Gary Trousdale, Jim Capobianco, Kevin Harkey, Jorgen Klubien,Chris Sanders, Tom Sito, Larry Leker, Joe Ranft, Rick Maki, Ed Gombert, Francis Glebas, Mark Kausler<br>
_Digitising Camera Supervisor_: Robyn L. Roberts<br>
_Animation Camera Operator_: John Aardal,  Andrew Simmons, Gary W. Smith<br>
_CGI Co-ordinator_: Maryann Mcleod<br>
_Computer Graphics Imagery_: Edward Kummer<br>
_Colour Models Supervisor_: Karen Comella<br>
_Supervising Animators: Young Simba_: Mark Henn; _Adult Simba_: Ruben Aquino; _Mufasa_: Tony Fucile; _Scar_: Andreas Deja; _Adult Nala_: Anthony Derosa; _Young Nala_: Aaron Blaise; _Pumbaa_: Tony Bancroft; _Timon_: Michael Surrey; _Rafiki_: James Baxter; _Zazu_: Ellen Woodbury; _Sarabi_: Russ Edmonds; _Hyenas_: David Burgess, Alex Kupershmidt<br>
_Supervising Character Lead: Young Simba_: Daniel A. Gracey; _Adult Simba_: Bill Berg; _Mufasa/Sarabi_: Brian Clift; _Scar_: Nancy Kniep; _Scar_: Kathleen Bailey, Marianne Tucker; _Adult Nala_: Scott Anderson; _Young Nala_: Tracy Mark Lee; _Timon & Pumbaa_: Debra Armstrong; _Rafiki_: Marshall Toomey; _Zazu_: Dan Tanaka; _Hyenas_: Alex Topete<br>
_Computer Animation (Wildebeest Stampede)_: Gregory Griffith, Linda Bel<br>
_Character Design/Visual Development_: Hans Bacher, Jean Gillmore, Joe Grant, Michael Hodgson, Lisa Keene, Sue C. Nichols, Bruce Zick, Mel Shaw, Bob Smith<br>
_Character Sculptures_: Kent Melton<br>
_Effects Animators_: Dorse Lanpher, Ted C. Kierscey, Ed Coffey, Christine Blum, Mauro Maressa, Tom Hush, Allen Blyth, David (Joey) Mildenberg, Eusebio Torres, Steve Moore, Marlon West, Garrett Wren, Chris Jenkins, Dave Bossert<br>
_Animation Check Supervisor_: Janet Bruce<br>
_Background_: Gregory Alexander Drolette, Don Moore, Kathy Altieri, Serge Michaels, Debbie Du Bois, Sunny Apinchapong, Michael Humphries, Natalie Franscioni-karp, Philip Phillipson, Barry Atkinson, Dan Cooper,Kevin Turcotte, Thomas Woodington, David McCamley, Dominick R. Domingo, Charles Vollmer, Barry R. Kooser,  Patricia Palmer-Phillipson, Brooks Campbell, Richard Sluiter<br>
_Ink and Paint manager_:  Gretchen Maschmeyer Albrecht<br>
_Paint Final Check Supervisor_:  Hortensia M. Casagran<br>
_Supervising Editors_: Tom Finan, John Carnochan<br>
_Editor_: Ivan Bilancio<br>
_Animation Editor_: Jim Melton<br>
_Production Designer_: Chris Sanders<br>
_Art Director_: Andy Gaskill<br>
_Artistic Co-ordinator_: Randy Fullmer<br>
_Scene Planning Supervisor_: Ann Tucker<br>
_Title Design_: Burke Mattsson, Susan Bradley<br>
_Titles_: Buena Vista Imaging<br>
_Music Composed, Arranged and Supervised by_: Hans Zimmer<br>
_Songs_: Tim Rice, Elton John<br>
_African Vocal Solos/Improvisations_: Lebo M.<br>
_Score Conducted by_: Nick Glennie-Smith<br>
_Supervising Music Editor_: Adam Milo Malley<br>
_Music Recorded and Mixed by_: Jay Rifkin<br>
_Original Dialogue Recording_: Doc Kane<br>
_Re-recording mixer_: Terry Porter, Mel Metcalfe, David J. Hudson<br>
_Supervising Sound Editor_: Richard L. Anderson, Mark Mangini<br>
_Special Sound Effects:_ John Pospisil<br>
_Sound Effects Editor:_ Michael Chock, James Christopher, Paul J. Berolzheimer<br>

**Voice Cast**<br>
Rowan Atkinson (_Zazu)_<br>
Matthew Broderick (_Simba)_<br>
Niketa Calame (_young Nala)_<br>
Jim Cummings (_Ed)_<br>
Whoopi Goldberg (_Shenzi)_<br>
Robert Guillaume _(Rafiki)_<br>
James Earl Jones _(Mufasa)_<br>
Moira Kelly _(Nala)_<br>
Nathan Lane _(Timon)_<br>
Cheech Marin _(Banzai)_<br>
Ernie Sabella _(Pumbaa)_<br>
Madge Sinclair _(Sarabi)_<br>
Jonathan Taylor Thomas _(young Simba)_<br>
Jeremy Irons _(Scar)_<br>

USA 1994©<br>
88 mins<br>
<br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTYwNDkwMjAzNV19
-->