

<![endif]-->

_+ intro by season curator, Justin Johnson (Thursday 6 July only)_

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

The 1950s were bookended by Disney princesses, _Cinderella_ (1949) and _Sleeping Beauty_ (1959). _Cinderella_ saved the Disney animation tradition, or a semblance of it. It re-established Disney as the world’s leading cartoon brand; small wonder later Mouse managements would use princesses to renew the line, with _The Little Mermaid_ in 1989 and _The Princess and the Frog_ two decades later. _Sleeping Beauty_’s failure, on the other hand, ended Walt’s dreams of besting his younger self, the immortal, unreachable Walt who’d made _Snow White_ a World War ago.

The Walt of _Snow White_ was obsessed with making the perfect cartoon, to the point of pathology. One animator quoted by historian Michael Barrier described Walt at that time, ‘like a madman, hair hanging down, perspiring... Christ, he was involved.’ But Walt was burned by frustrations and flops, including his beloved _Fantasia_ (1940). By _Cinderella_, cartoons were making way for other toys. For much of _Cinderella_’s production, Walt wasn’t even in America. Rather he was at Bristol harbour in England, overseeing Robert Newton and Bobby Driscoll on the first wholly live-action Disney feature, _Treasure Island_. During that time, _Cinderella_’s three directors mailed him memos, scripts and storyboards across the Atlantic.

Live-action was pervading Disney in other ways. The London release of _Cinderella_ was double-billed with _Seal Island_ (1948), the first of Disney’s ‘True-Life Adventures’ nature films. _Cinderella_ itself was largely pre-shot in live-action, not just as motion-reference for the animators, but as an economic way of defining cutting, staging and (in practice) viewpoints. The wholly cartoon scenes, as anyone could guess, were the cat and mice conflicts, mainly animated by Ward Kimball.

_Cinderella_’s literal staging makes its live-action language overt, even as the cartoon effects can feel a trifle thin by Disney’s prior standards (for example, when Cinderella is multiply reflected in a cloud of bubbles). More striking are the frequent touches of _noir_. When Cinderella enters the Stepmother’s bedroom, she’s framed by bars of shadow. There’s more ostentatious chiaroscuro after her dress is destroyed by her spiteful sisters. Seen from above, Cinderella runs into the dwarfing dark of a hall, her figure illumined in one opening door, then another. The dress-tearing itself is a set of violent cuts, the rending implicit as Hitchcock might have liked.

For all these touches, many reviewers found the human scenes unbearably bland. Cinderella herself was variously called a blond nonentity, an American bobbysoxer and Snow White’s doughy sister. Japanese director Hayao Miyazaki has bemoaned the live-action approach: ‘In trying to achieve a sense of symbolism by using an average young American woman as the model, [the Disney animators] lost even more of the inherent symbolism of the original story than they did with _Snow White_.’ But the Cinderella character, drawn by Marc Davis and Eric Larson, actually stands up rather well for Disneyfied womanhood: she’s mischievous, lightly ironic and a valued ally to the animals, not a passive idol like Snow White.

Sadly, her Prince is a stiff, and the film fatally stalls during their ball encounter, though there’s a surprising stress on Cinderella’s female gaze in the staging and soundtrack (she leads the romantic number, ‘So This Is Love’). The meeting is accompanied by ravishing night-blue art direction, spearheaded by Mary Blair. Its failure to save the scene should have been a warning to _Sleeping Beauty_, which often feels like nothing but design.

But _Cinderella_ is really the adventure of the mice Gus and Jaq, both voiced by sound effects legend Jimmy MacDonald, who provided Mickey’s falsetto after Walt. For me, nothing matches the greedy Gus’s efforts to carry one more piece of cheese from the barnyard; at last he successfully braces the morsel against his teeth and totters away, straight into the leering cat Lucifer. The monster’s golden moment is a game of Find the Lady, as Gus cowers under teacups. The cat picks up the right cup, puts it down, realises what he’s done, and pulls a happy-sappy pose of tongue-wagging, paw-waving delight, which flows perfectly from the dancing rhythm. The snag: the floor-level antics suck the human world down the mousehole.

_Cinderella_, a lesser film than any of Disney’s early masterpieces, is still one of the best four or five cartoon features that the studio would make in the next forty years. (_Sleeping Beauty_ had treble _Cinderella_’s budget, and perhaps half its charisma, momentum and fun.) As an elegantly tamed _Snow White_, _Cinderella_’s cover-version takes you back to the original. What if _Snow White_’s true successors, such as _Pinocchio_ or _Fantasia_, had been as popular? Would Walt have stayed married to animation, not dallying with live-action and Mickey parks? Where could his dreams have led? It’s like asking where would today’s animation be had _The Simpsons_ flopped, or _Toy Story_.  
**Extract from Andrew Osmond, _100 Animated Feature Films_ (BFI/Palgrave Macmillan, 2010) Reproduced by kind permission of Bloomsbury Publishing. ©Andrew Osmond**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTI3Njg2NDI3Nl19
-->