


<![endif]-->

Male chauvinist pigs meet 1930s girl power in Powell’s superior quota-quickie, in which chemists seeking a formula for fireproofing celluloid take exception to colleague Mary’s upcoming promotion – she’s a woman after all, and a ‘serious-minded little frump’ to boot. A plot to distract her from her vocation via shameless seduction ensues, but will Mary find true love after all? Powell’s answer to the screwball comedy is polished off with Deco designs and lashings of witty banter.

Simon McCallum, bfi.org.uk

Michael Powell sometimes used the very circumstances of the cinema in which he worked for story material. In _The Red Ensign_ (1934) for instance, the quota act is the basis for a plot about a shipbuilder determined to stop the beleaguered British shipping industry being run down by ships flying under foreign flags. _The Love Test_ (1935) instead revolves around attempts to render celluloid less flammable, the highly combustible properties of nitrate film stock being one of the reasons why so many movies from the period have vanished.

What is impressive about _The Love Test_ is not so much the hackneyed story (at a research lab, boy meets girl, boy loses girl, boy gets girl), but rather its sexual subtext and frequently stylish presentation. Powell’s visual grace notes (with credit also due to cinematographer Arthur Crabtree) include a complicated opening tracking shot (over a minute long) that snakes all around the central research lab; ‘framing’ the lovers (in a taxi, in the corner of a restaurant, or through a gap in the laboratory equipment) to create more intimate romantic scenes; and giving the climax a small stylistic fillip by having the hero’s voice, when suddenly heard in the office through a heating shaft, matched visually by a series of quickly edited shots of the grille to heighten the impact of the scene.

This is the earliest of Powell’s films to point to the sensuousness and sexuality which later became so prominent in his work. While using incendiary nitrate dolls for transitions in the stages of the couple’s love affair is plain enough, a real surprise is the subtle but clear suggestion of lesbianism in the character of Mary’s neighbour, who ‘feminises’ her with new clothes, make-up and hair-do and is then permanently excluded when Hayward arrives. This is contrasted amusingly with scenes in which Googie Withers gives Hayward kissing ‘lessons’, in a role that _Variety_ magazine, in its inimitable style, described as ‘a gum-chewing secretary-vamp who crank-starts Hayward’s engine’.

These elements reveal the enthusiasm, vigour and humour that mark many of Powell’s surviving quota features. In the movie, Hayward finds a commercially viable solution to making nitrate film less flammable; sadly, the film industry itself wasn’t able to do so until 1951. _The Love Test_, a film long thought lost, was, fortunately, restored and re-presented at the London Film Festival in 1990.

Sergio Angelini, BFI Screenonline, screenonline.org.uk

**Something Always Happens**

After three films at Gaumont-British, Powell returned to quota productions with this sprightly comedy about a freeloading charmer who romances the daughter of a wealthy petrol station owner, before conflict ensues when he takes a job with a rival. No surprise if that sounds like a Hollywood screwball: the story was lifted from the script library of Warner Bros’ American offices.

James Bell, bfi.org.uk

_Something Always Happens_, a comedy where authority figures get taken down a peg or two while the poor get rich quick, neatly encompasses many of the recurring themes of Depression-era cinema in 1930s Britain. In fact most of the 23 low budget films Michael Powell directed between 1931 and 1936 focus on money and class in some way. A third element, which obliquely combines the two, is hypergamy, marriage to a person of a class higher than one’s own, which appears in _Night of the Party_ (1934) and _Her Last Affaire_ (1935), but is nicely reversed in _Something Always Happens_.

The film tries to have its cake and eat it, its amiable but lackadaisical hero (Ian Hunter), blissfully unconcerned by his lack of money or prospects, eventually still becoming hugely rich. His seemingly imperturbable character prefigures the one Hunter would play in _Lazybones_ (1935), where once again he has to prove himself by getting a steady job and making a success of it. This foregrounds the aspirational tendencies of most moviegoers of the time, showing that even those without money can become a success through perseverance and ingenuity

The nexus between high and low society had already been ingeniously explored by Powell in _Rynox_ (1931), in which the rich Benedik and the working-class ruffian Marsh aren’t just two sides of the same coin, but actually turn out to be the same person, part of a complicated scheme to save Benedik’s ailing company. Brock Williams’ tightly structured screenplay for _Something Always Happens_ goes out of its way to draw parallels between rich and poor, young and old, as dialogue and actions are repeated or developed in adjacent scenes, constantly juxtaposing contrasting situations and characters to draw out the links that tie them together. This is emphasised in the early scene in which the destitute hero pretends to be rich while the fabulously wealthy girl he’s just met lets him believe she is a poor shop girl.

This slick, fast moving comedy makes good use of its location filming (especially the market scene) and offers, despite a rather insipid leading lady, a variety of incidental pleasures, such as casting George Zucco (shortly before he decamped for Hollywood) as an Italian restaurant owner. Powell himself remembered it affectionately: ‘We played it all out for laughs; great speed, excellent dialogue and it was about a chap who never paid for anything’.  
**Sergio Angelini, BFI Screenonline, screenonline.org.uk**  
<br>
<![endif]-->

**THE LOVE TEST
_Directed by_: Michael Powell  
_Presented by_: Fox Film Company Ltd.  
_Unit Producer_: Leslie L. Landau  
_Scenario & Dialogue by_: Selwyn Jepson  
_An Original Story by_: Jack Celestin  
_Photography by_: Arthur Crabtree  
_Sound System_: Visatone-Marconi  
_Produced at_: Wembley Studios  
_uncredited:_  
_Production Company_: Fox-British Pictures  
_Producer_: John Findlay  

**Cast**  
Judy Gunn _(Mary Lee)_  
Louis Hayward _(John Gregg)_  
Dave Hutcheson _(Thompson)_  
Googie Withers _(Minnie)_  
Morris Harvey _(company president)_  
Aubrey Dexter _(company vice-president)_  
Jack Knight _(managing director)_  
Gilbert Davis _(Hosiah H. Smith, chief chemist)_  
Eve Turner _(Kathleen)_  
Bernard Miles _(Allan)_  
Shayle Gardner _(night watchman)_  
James Craig _(boiler man)_

_uncredited:_
Ian Wilson _(‘Amoeba’, a chemist)_  
Thorley Walters _(chemist)_  

UK 1935  
64 mins  
Digital 4K  

**SOMETHING ALWAYS HAPPENS**  
_Director_: Michael Powell  
_Production Company_: Warner Brothers First National Productions  
_Executive Producer_: Irving Asher  
_Screenplay/Dialogue_: Brock Williams  
_Director of Photography_: Basil Emmott  
_Editor_: Ralph Dawson  
_Art Director_: Peter Proud  
_Gowns_: Louis Brooks  
_Sound_: Leslie Murray, H.C. Pearson  

**Cast**  
Ian Hunter _(Peter Middleton)_  
Nancy O’Neil _(Cynthia Hatch)_  
Peter Gawthorne _(Benjamin Hatch)_  
Johnny Singer _(Billy)_  
Muriel George _(Mrs Badger, the landlady)_  
Barry Livesey _(George Hamlin)_  
_uncredited:_  
Millicent Wolf _(Glenda)_  
Louie Emery _(Mrs Tremlett)_  
Reg Marcus _(‘Coster’)_  
George Zucco _(proprietor of ‘Café de Paris’)_  
Janet Fitzpatrick  

UK 1934  
66 mins  
Digital 4K  

Remastering has been supported by Matt Spick and the Charles Skey Charitable Trust.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTExMTU0NzE4MTUsODI0MDA5MDQ5LDY2Nj
Y2OTY0XX0=
-->