


<![endif]-->

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

The main character in _A Story of Floating Weeds,_ Kihachi Ichikawa, is an echo of the protagonist of _Passing Fancy_, though he is neither as stupid nor as carefree as his predecessor. The muting of Kihachi’s character derives, like other subdued factors in _A Story of Floating Weeds_, from the surrounding material which Ozu has included. The film is played in a remote rural village, a realistic locale for the travelling troupe but an unusual setting for Ozu at this point in his career. The _cinéaste_ of urban Tokyo, of _nansensu_ [nonsense comedies] and _moga_ [modern girls], must now impose his narrational system on a different Japanese iconography: the village street, the landscape, the forlorn café, the decaying theatre. He must film a traditional, if ineptly staged, performance. He can no longer cut away to Lincolns or spinning ventilators or Nipper the RCA dog. Ozu now experiments with treating centuries-old material in his own, recently matured manner.

His attempt is thoroughgoing. Instead of puckish cartoons behind the credits, he uses burlap, as if to assert the rustic purity of his tale. The characters wear _kimono_ and play Japanese chess. The very title is a change for Ozu: instead of the vernacular catch-phrase or joke, we have a self-conscious metaphor comparing itinerant players to duckweeds that drift with the tides. Most strikingly, Ozu draws upon the iconography of Japanese religious traditions. Religious motifs are justified by the rural milieu, but Ozu absorbs them into characteristic cutaways. The scene of the troupe’s unpacking is prefaced by a close-up of one _kamidana_, or Shinto ‘god shelf’. Later Ozu cuts from a second _kamidana_ to a third, fully laid out with cut paper, rope, and salt. Here the two _kamidana_ are employed as an ambiguous transition moving from a rehearsal to a premiere. Later this traditional sign of good fortune is employed ironically. When the performance is interrupted by rain, Ozu cuts back to the third _kamidana_.

Another religious image, derived more from folk traditions than from shrine Shinto, is the ‘god’ tree near which Otoki waits to seduce Shinkichi. Otoki’s casual intrusion into a sacred space underlines the extent to which the actress is an outsider to the village, and again the religious motif is introduced ironically: a holy spot used to make a date. Significantly, Ozu’s characteristically late introduction of a motif is here reserved for the _daruma_ at which Otsune looks twice in the film. The _daruma_, the roly-poly doll that always rights itself, is Japan’s popular image of Bodhidarma, the founder of Zen Buddhism who is said to have meditated so long that his legs dropped off. As a customary image of good fortune and successful achievement, the _daruma_ forms a Buddhist equivalent for the Shinto _kamidana_, and its employment is no less ironic. Otsune first glances up at the _daruma_ after Shinichi goes out on a secret visit to Otoki. In the climactic scene, she consoles Kihachi for the loss of his troupe (‘Even a doll is pitiful if you let it alone for a long time’) and Ozu cuts to the _daruma_. Finally, after Kihachi has left for good and his family stands weeping, the narration cuts back to the _daruma_ and then to the upstairs room where he had played _shogi_ with his son. In the context created by the _daruma_, the steaming teapot in the rear (a motif associated with Otsune’s household) cites the poetic cliché of life’s evanescence. (Similarly, the earlier fishing scene insists so much on the way that father and son stand in the river that it evokes Shinto’s doctrine of purification by water.)

An interpretative critic might go on to see the film as enacting a ‘battle’ of Japanese religions, with official Shinto and folk religion ‘defeated’ by a final emergence of Zen Buddhism. But this would miss the obvious and clichéd nature of the imagery which Ozu uses opportunistically, as pretext for asides (are these not the picturesque cutaways of an urban outsider?) and as realistically motivated material for formal patterning. Yet this material, unlike the yoyos and victrolas of _Dragnet Girl_, resists complete assimilation. The toning down of Kihachi’s character and the replacement of decentring gaps by a subdued irony are only two symptoms of a general muting of formal work. It is as if the rural subject and the religious iconography could not, at the risk of transgressing one currently powerful definition of Japanese tradition, become completely obedient to Ozu’s aesthetic system. The _daruma_ cannot be made the butt of visual jokes as Nipper is, and village life cannot be satirised as severely as can the student or salaryman culture.  
**David Bordwell, _Ozu and the Poetics of Cinema_ (BFI/Princeton, 1988) Reproduced by kind permission of Bloomsbury Publishing © David Bordwell**  

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMjEwMTcwMjUzXX0=
-->