



While Mario Bava’s formative 1963 murder mystery _The Girl Who Knew Too Much_ set the giallo blueprint, Argento’s soaring debut, about an American in Rome who fears for his life after witnessing an attempted murder in an art gallery, crystallised the sub-genre’s popularity. Launching Argento to international stardom and gaining him several Hitchcock comparisons along the way, the film is a veritable checklist of the visual and thematic obsessions that he would return to throughout his career.  
**bfi.org.uk**

Dario Argento was working as a film critic for the Rome newspaper _Paese Sera_ when he started writing screenplays, notably collaborating with Bernardo Bertolucci on the script for Sergio Leone’s _C’era una volta il West_/_Once Upon a Time in the West_ (1968). In 1969 he adapted (uncredited) Fredric Brown’s 1949 novel _The Screaming Mimi_ which he took before the cameras under the title _L’uccello dalle piume di cristallo_ (_The Bird with the Crystal Plumage_) later in the year. It was an immediate hit when it opened in in Italy in February 1970 and launched Argento on a career that would peak in the late 70s but continue on until into the next millennium.

It’s a remarkably assured debut, a taut and unrelenting example of that peculiarly Italian genre, the _giallo_, brutal tales of sex and violence named after the yellow-jacketed murder-mystery paperbacks published by Mondadori from the late 1920s, reprinting the likes of Agatha Christie, Edgar Wallace and Raymond Chandler. It’s a film that oozes both style and a youthful arrogance, Argento displaying a supreme confidence in his own abilities rare in directors making their first feature. As will all of his best films, he packs it full of memorable set-pieces, innovative camerawork and pioneering use of unexpected musical case (in this case, a jazz-inflected score supplied by Ennio Morricone).

The plot is Argento’s first workout of one of his favourite obsessions – the protagonist who sees something that they can’t quite remember, a detail that eventually turns out to be the key that unravels the mystery. Here, the protagonist is American writer in Rome (two more of Argento’s recurring tropes – the out-of-place American and the creative artist) Sam Dalmas (Tony Musante) who witnesses a woman being attacked in an art gallery while out on a late night walk. Trapped between two glass doors, Dalmas is helpless and although the woman, Monica (Eva Renzi) survives the attack, her assailant escapes. Sure that he saw something vital that he can’t recall, Dalmas becomes obsessed with solving the mystery, putting himself and his girlfriend Julia (Suzy Kendall) in danger.

The plot, as would become standard in the _giallo_ film throughout the 70s, is suitably convoluted. _Gialli_ had come to the screen in the early 1960s through the work of Mario Bava (_La ragazza che sapeva troppo_/_The Girl Who Knew Too Much_ (1963), _Sei donne per l’assassino_/_Blood and Black Lace_ (1964)) but it was _L’uccello dalle piume di cristallo_ that helped propel the genre into a new decade with a renewed sense of urgency, upping the levels of sex and violence. It acts as a blueprint from which not only so many of the subsequent _gialli_ were struck but also from which Argento drew much of his early career. He would almost obsessively rework those key tropes first explored here, most successfully in _Profondo rosso_/_Deep Red_ (1975).

Assured though it is, it’s by no means perfect. One of the main criticisms levelled at Argento – an entirely justified one – is that he cares less for the mechanics of his plots than he does for the visuals used to bring then to life. Here, Dalmas’ investigations can get a tad plodding at times, as if Argento was just looking for something to keep things ticking over until the next set-piece hoves into view. It tends to meander at times, as though Argento couldn’t quite think up anything interesting for Dalmas to do between encounters with the mysterious assailant.

But he makes up for the narrative slackness with ravishing photography (courtesy of Vittorio Storaro) and those extraordinarily memorable set pieces – Sam trapped between the glass doors, impotently trying to save Monica from her attacker; a chase through a junkyard; Dalmas trapped again, this time beneath a bizarre metal sculpture as the truth about the killer is finally revealed. It’s in these scenes where Argento really shines, directing with a real sense of energy and with an eye for the unusual angle, the stunning set design and the perfect colour palette. He may not have cared too much about the minutiae of the plot, but he’s fully invested in these moments.

Beautiful, thrilling, often deeply unsettling, _L’uccello dalle piume di cristallo_ was a debut that Argento found initially hard to follow. His second film, _Il gatto a nove code_/_The Cat o’ Nine Tails_ (1971) is another thriller but a rather mundane one compared to his debut. It’s by no means bad – far from it in fact – but it rather pales by comparison to his bravura debut. In Maitland McDonagh’s 1991 study of Argento’s films, _Broken Mirrors, Broken Minds: The Dark Dreams of Dario Argento_, the director admitted that wasn’t pleased with the way that the film turned out and has repeatedly cited it as his least favourite film. His third film, _4 mosche di velluto grigio_/_Four Flies on Grey Velvet_ (1971) saw him back on form and for the rest of the decade, Argento didn’t look back, constructing a string of outstanding horror thrillers the quality of which he’s sadly failed to replicate for many years.  
**Kevin Lyons, eofftvreview.wordpress.com, 26 October 2018**

**A contemporary review**  
Apart from one or two concessions to contemporary fashions in violence in the shape of some gory stabbings, this murder mystery (something of a novelty from the Italian studios) is developed more or less in the classic Hollywood tradition and is all the better for it. Repeated flashbacks to the crucial scene provide ample opportunity for audience participation in true Hitchcock manner, and Dario Argento’s direction is well paced throughout, if occasionally a little overwrought. Fluid camerawork, capable performances, and an effectively eerie score by Ennio Morricone all help to mask a few holes in the otherwise tidily written plot. Altogether an eminently watchable film from a director of some promise.  
**_Monthly Film Bulletin_, November 1970**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTgwODE2ODA1MV19
-->