---
layout: post
title: Sunshine
published: true
date: 2023-02-02
readtime: true
categories: ['KUROSAWA']
tags: [Drama, Crime, Film noir]
metadata: 'Japan 1948, 93 mins<br> Director: Akira Kurosawa'
pdf: '2023-02-02-drunken-angel.pdf'
---

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

It’s 2057. The sun is dying and the Earth is in a precipitous state, with all life threatened as the planet turns into a frozen wasteland. Hope lies with the small crew of Icarus II, who are carrying a massive bomb that will hopefully jump-start the fading star. But the crew soon realises there’s as great a danger aboard their vessel as there is in the celestial object that awaits them.

Written by Alex Garland, Danny Boyle’s psychological thriller is a visually dazzling, genre-bending exercise in suspense.  
**bfi.org.uk**  

**A contemporary review**   
In Danny Boyle’s _Sunshine_ we do not see people gathering in bars to watch newscasts from Paris or London and cheering on the heroic astronauts of Icarus II on their mission to revive the sun. When at last we get a glimpse of Earth, stuck in near-permanent winter, it’s a rather unapocalyptic Christmas-card landscape with kids making snowmen. No one whoops it up at mission control, and for all we know the only person who realises the mission has succeeded in ‘saving mankind and so on’ is the sister of the ship’s chief physicist Capa, who receives a video message from him. By eliminating the disaster-movie convention of giving doomsday an on-screen audience, as in the generically similar _Armageddon_ (1998) and _The Day after Tomorrow_ (2004), Sunshine removes the sickly screen-traversing sense of camaraderie in the face of catastrophe that – along with the spectacle of cities being destroyed – forms a part of those films’ appeal. Yet Boyle’s overturning of genre expectations is no mere nose-thumbing idiosyncrasy: _Sunshine_’s exclusion of the summer blockbusters’ surrogate audience intensifies its grip on its actual audience.

Without stinting on popcorn thrills, Alex Garland’s script consistently pits the viewer’s desire to see the crew of Icarus II survive against the crew’s own determination to complete their mission. The death of everyone on board is more or less unavoidable from the get-go, and as the film reaches its climax, all dramatic choices boil down to the need to reach the target, every chance of survival or escape ruled out by the depletion of the ship’s oxygen supplies (despite the suggestion that three ‘breathers’ be killed to save the mission). Co-pilot Cassie, the film’s most sympathetic character, is also the most frequently wrong, as when she chooses to save Capa and Captain Kaneda rather than extinguish a fire that threatens the entire ship. And yet, far from providing a neat opposition between the rational and the humanistic, the crew’s motivation is nicely complicated by the uncertainty of the whole mission.

Capa’s decision to dock with Icarus I, sent on the same mission seven years earlier, is made by weighing ‘risk of detour, benefits of second bomb’ as psych officer Searle puts it, with the scales tipped by the uncertainty that either payload will have the intended effect anyway. But Capa is using the abundance of imponderables to cover his curiosity about the fate of the first mission, and even his desire to rescue its crew. When, waxing poetic, he tells Cassie that he is looking forward to seeing a new star born at the moment of his own immolation, he isn’t just spinning her a line. All that is certain is death, and Capa’s positive acceptance of this fact is only the obverse of the wish of Icarus I’s captain, Pin backer, to abort the mission and make himself the last man alone with God. Likewise Searle’s decision to stay on Icarus I to save two of his crewmates combines altruistic and nihilistic urges since it enables him to experience the sun’s heat without a filter. Heroic self-sacrifice shades into death-drive.

As with Garland and Boyle’s previous sci-fi collaboration _28 Days Later_ (2002), this is the end of the world done without much in the way of laughs or kisses; visually, however, it is anything but gloomy, leaving the aggressively ‘digital’ look of the earlier film somewhat time-bound. Throughout, Boyle and ace DoP Alwin Kuchler (_Morvern Callar_, _Code 46_) exploit elemental contrasts of darkness and light, heat and cold, with the CGI and model work beautiful but mostly unobtrusive until the radically disorienting final scenes. As Pin backer fights Capa and Cassie aboard the tumbling payload, Boyle throws out temporal and spatial continuity – as well as a certain degree of comprehensibility – in a genuinely breath-taking sequence that combines visceral terror with Kubrickian wonder.  
**Henry K. Miller, _Sight and Sound_, April 2007**  
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTE5MjQ3Nzc5MF19
-->