
With her first two films – _Water Lilies_ (2007) and _Tomboy_ (2011) – Céline Sciamma sought to explore the complexity and range of female experience in contemporary France. _Water Lilies_ examined the sexual coming of age of three teenage girls in a Paris suburb, while _Tomboy_ focused on a ten-year-old girl who passes for a boy after moving to a new neighbourhood and starts up an ambiguous friendship with another girl. But while both were clearly representative of aspects of modern teenage girls’ lives, Sciamma seems intent on making a bolder claim for her latest film. ‘With _Girlhood_…’ she says, her eyebrow cocked as she waits out a pregnant pause, ‘I decided that French young women today are this girl.’

The girl in question is Marieme (Karidja Touré), the film’s central character, a Black teenager living in the banlieues beyond the rim of Paris’s Boulevard Périphérique. With her single mother (Binta Diop) working nights as a cleaner, Marieme is left to parent her younger sisters and fend off her bullying older brother (Cyril Mendy), who watches over her like a hawk. She passes out of the school system, forced out by the limited prospects offered to her as much as walking away, into the company of a gang of three fiercely independent girls – the leader Lady (Assa Sylla) and her two best friends Fily (Mariétou Touré) and Adiatou (Lindsay Karamoh) – until difficult circumstances rouse her to redefine herself again. When I meet Sciamma following _Girlhood_’s UK premiere at the 2014 BFI London Film Festival, comparisons between her film and Richard Linklater’s _Boyhood_ seem inevitable. But since _Girlhood_ doesn’t share the same childhood to adulthood narrative arc and the films’ similarities really begin and end with their his-and-hers epithets, it’s surprising that Sciamma herself should seize on the association. ‘What is _Boyhood_?’ she asks. ‘It’s a white, middle-class young man, having average dreams, average thoughts.’

Sciamma is a calm, intelligent interviewee, if a little withdrawn to begin with. She has that French sang-froid, with languid movements that suggest absolute assurance. She responds levelly and thoughtfully, and is generous with her answers, notwithstanding the frustration of having to discuss her work in a foreign language. (‘I’m sorry; I lack vocabulary,’ she says. ‘I was a lousy student in English, but I lived abroad for two years in Singapore as a kid, and so…’ And so she clearly has an excellent memory.) When she gives a brief answer, it is because a brief answer will suffice.

One suspects she doesn’t really believe there’s anything to be gained from equating _Girlhood_ with _Boyhood_, that she has no real argument with Linklater. She chose her title before ever hearing of _Boyhood_, and likes it better than the French _Bande de filles_. And it isn’t the first time the filmmaker has looked to the English language for a title. She did so with _Tomboy_, rejecting the French equivalent – _garçon manqué_ – as too pejorative in its literal meaning: ‘failed boy’.

But since she sees _Boyhood_ as a fundamentally mainstream tale, I ask how conscious she is of what has and hasn’t already been made, and whether her filmmaking is a deliberate corrective to absences in contemporary cinema. ‘I go for a film when I feel there’s a connection between something I want to tell – the fact that it has a strong fictional potential – and the fact that there’s the need to look at it, a political need, a representational need... an intimate urgency, and a collective one, and it’s in that order, you know?’

Sciamma has come in for criticism for inferring that Marieme’s racially conditioned experience could ever be a catch-all for the general teenage experience. Sciamma is a white woman, who, in her own words, does not ‘effectively’ know her characters. By linking her film – conspicuous by its difference to anything else in the marketplace – to _Boyhood_, she is diminishing the singularity of this highly visible film about a low-visibility subject: ‘They are not often looked at, Black girls.’

But it is clear that Sciamma means her film to be universal in the sense that Marieme’s story covers all the bases – much as she hoped _Tomboy_ would strike a chord with the transgender viewer and cisgendered girls uncomfortable with conventional notions of femininity, as well as audiences of all sexual orientations. But in the case of _Girlhood_, Sciamma doesn’t seem interested in detailing the reasons why a Black girl from a low-income family should be able to speak for all girls her age, turning the argument on its head by saying, ‘Why shouldn’t she?’

Sciamma writes out of ‘strong identification’ with her characters, scripting from start to finish alone, and as the focus of all her films is on the female, ‘girlhood’ would serve as an apt umbrella-banner for the films she’s made: a trilogy only in retrospect, because she is adamant that this is the last film she’ll make about adolescence with a non-professional cast: ‘I don’t know what I’m going to do next. I just know that I’m going to stop… I have to be a grownup now. I want to work with actors – I mean, actors who chose to be actors.’

If the triptych was unpremeditated, Sciamma is at least sympathetic to the term: ‘_Water Lilies_ was about the beginning of teenage-hood; _Tomboy_, the end of childhood; and this one is about the end of teenagehood.’ In these transitional phases in the young life of a girl she has found her ‘strong fictional potential’, and feels the visual medium of film is particularly suited to their expression. Her films are fairly muted – _Girlhood_, the most talkative to date – and their focus, as she’s stated before, is on the ‘how’ rather than ‘why’ of her characters’ behaviour.

Cinema befits her subjects in still another way. Marieme, like _Tomboy_’s young protagonist Laure/Mickaël, observes the world attentively in a way that encourages audiences to look closer and more meditatively at Sciamma’s characters. Their looking is, in part, a condition of their marginality, and inexorably connected to desire. Marieme wishes to be assimilated into the freethinking, free-acting girl group she admires. In a key scene in which the girls mime to Rihanna’s pop-track ‘Diamonds’ – ‘The scene I most fantasised about,’ says Sciamma, admitting that it was ‘very choreographed’ despite its apparent freeness – Marieme, islanded on the hotel-room bed, watches her friends adoringly as they dance in front of her, before, in a pivotal moment, standing up to join them.

Sciamma’s films show us that looking – in spite of the prevalence of the male gaze – is a feminine proclivity, and with _Girlhood_ she takes the idea one step further. In a memorably charged night-time sequence, Marieme stalks with intent to the home of her boyfriend Ismaël. Waking him up, she has him take off his clothes, and turn over in the bed at her bidding. He does as he’s told as she watches. ‘It’s powerful because we never see it,’ Sciamma says. ‘But it’s crazy that we never see it. People tell me it’s an inversion. I say, “Yeah, it’s an inversion – of how we represent heterosexual sex onscreen.” But it’s not an inversion of how it actually happens, I hope. It would be so sad otherwise. I’m not a pro at heterosexual sex, but come on!’

If representing heterosexual sex is a first for Sciamma, so is shooting in CinemaScope with an all-Black cast in a tech-literate setting, with mobile phones and viral video. But it’s through these firsts that _Girlhood_ becomes the crowning culmination of the three films, whose common concern is the multiplicity of what it is to be female. _Girlhood_’s girls are complex, capable of seemingly contradictory behaviours: innocent and adept at intimidation, playful and violent, loyal and competitive, juvenile and maternal. Was the film meant to be a comment on cinema’s apparent need for female characters to be consolidated or archetypal? ‘It’s absolutely the centre of the project – to try to make plural portraits of the same girl, being in contradiction, in paradox, and not being one thing. [In other films] with girl-characters there’s one energy, one language. I wanted them to speak several languages, because they do.’ The motive of the film, its ‘political project’, is to ‘to fight this idea of assignation’.

Marieme, more than any of Sciamma’s other characters, positively embodies this resistance. By the film’s open-ended conclusion, which sees Marieme exit the screen – not by walking away from us into an affirmative future, but laterally across the frame – she is wearing ‘the braids of childhood, the make-up of womanhood, and the [masculine] clothes of boyhood, and she’s everything and nothing. She has to become.’  
**Thirza Wakefield, _Sight and Sound_, June 2015**
<br><br>

**GIRLHOOD (BANDE DE FILLES)**  
_Director_: Céline Sciamma  
©: Hold Up Films & Productions, Lilies Films,  Arte France Cinéma  
_With the participation of_:  Centre National du Cinéma et de l’Image Animée  
_With the support of_: Fonds Images de la diversité et de l'Acsé, Région Île-de France  
_With the participation of_: Canal+,  Arte France, Ciné+  
_In association with_: Pyramide Distribution,  Films Distribution, Arte Cofinova 9  
_Production Company_: Hold Up Films, Lilies Films  
_In co-production with_: Arte France Cinéma  
_Presents_: Hold Up Films, Lilies Films  
_[Presented] in co-production with_:  Arte France Cinéma  
_International Sales_: Films Distribution  
_Produced by_: Bénédicte Couvreur  
_Production Manager_: Gaetane Josse  
_1st Assistant Director_: Delphine Daull  
_Casting_: Christel Baras  
_Screenplay_: Céline Sciamma  
_Cinematographer_: Crystel Fournier  
_1st Assistant Operator_: Aurélien Dubois  
_Steadicam Operator_: Stéphane Chollet  
_Special Effects_: Artful FX  
_Editor_: Julien Lacheray  
_Art Director_: Thomas Grézaud  
_Costumes_: Céline Sciamma  
_Make-up Supervisor_: Marie Luiset  
_Titles_: Laurent Sciamma  
_Original Music_: Para One  
_Musicians_: François Lasserre, David Patrois,  Arthur Simonini  
_Sound Recordist_: Pierre André  
_Sound Mixer_: Daniel Sobrino  
_Sound Editor_: Pierre André  
_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Gregg Loffredo

**Cast**  
Karidja Touré _(Marieme/Vic)_  
Assa Sylla _(Lady)_  
Lindsay Karamoh _(Adiatou)_  
Marietou Touré _(Fily)_  
Idrissa Diabaté _(Ismaël)_  
Simina Soumare _(Bébé)_  
Cyril Mendy _(Djibril)_  
Djibril Gueye _(Abou)_  
Dielika Coulibaly _(Monica)_  
Binta Diop _(Asma)_  
Chance N’Guessan _(Mini)_  
Rabah Naït Oufella _(Kader)_  
Damien Chapelle _(Cédric)_  
Nina Melo _(Caidy)_  
Elyes Sabyani _(Abdel)_

France 2014©  
113 mins
<br><br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNTMwNjU3OTYzXX0=
-->