
<![endif]-->

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

In an age when few arthouse films cause riots or give rise to parliamentary debates, it’s difficult to envisage the sheer seismic force of the Italian release of Federico Fellini’s _La dolce vita_ in February 1960. In Milan, the glass doors of the Cinema Capitol gave way in the crush to get in; a few days later a rightwing parliamentarian stood up in Italy’s lower house, the Camera dei Deputati, to deplore the ‘corrosive’ effects of a film that ‘infiltrates the worm of a materialist easy life, devoid of ideals, into our young generations, contributing to the destructive work of subversive political forces.’ The Vatican newspaper even printed a letter from an indignant reader suggesting that Anita Ekberg should be prosecuted ‘on the basis of article 498 of the Penal Code’ for dressing up as a priest. But the controversy only contributed to the film’s success. In the end, 12 million Italians would see _La dolce vita_ in cinemas – around one in three of the country’s adult population.

Missing the point, as those early polemicists did, has been a feature of the film’s reception ever since. This is Fellini’s most celebrated work – but also, in a way, his least understood. Everyone remembers pneumatic Anita Ekberg in her strapless black dress amidst the gushing water of the Trevi Fountain. Few recall the tragic Steiner episode, or the false miracle, or the first appearance of Paola (Valeria Ciangottini), the fragile adolescent beauty who lights up the film’s oneiric finale. Then and now, readings of _La dolce vita_ are too often clouded by its setting – the Via Veneto scene of 1958-59, with its snapping paparazzi and inebriating round of late-night parties and casual couplings – as opposed to what it is really about.

Fellini was a willing accomplice in this mystification. The fact that his journalist protagonist played by Marcello Mastroianni is called Marcello is just one of the fact/fiction blurs that Italian cinema’s most able showman deliberately set up; another is the film’s use of non-professionals playing (more or less) themselves, like the aristocrats in the tenebrous Palazzo Odescalchi party scene, or the local and expatriate journalists, poets, artists, musicians and intellectuals who appear at the Palazzo, at the Sylvia press conference, at the Steiner house and in the Fregene ‘orgy’ sequence towards the end.

Even the shooting process was a calculated part of the show that walked the tightrope between true and false. _La dolce vita_ was inspired by Via Veneto, yet Via Veneto was entirely reconstructed, down to the smallest detail, inside the director’s beloved Teatro 5 sound stage at Cinecittà. The Trevi Fountain we see in the film, on the other hand, is real – but it’s lit to make it look fake, as if knocked up earlier that day by the studio carpenters.

Fellini was in his element the night they shot there, playing to the crowd of onlookers that had gathered to see the Swedish diva get her frock wet. From his director’s chair, he turned his megaphone on his ‘audience’ to comment in Roman dialect, half approvingly and half ironically: ‘Where would you find another woman like this? I’ve made her do things even a circus horse wouldn’t do – and now I’m going to throw her in the water.’ He wasn’t just playing to the crowd, of course – he was playing to the journalists who had been invited along to witness the spectacle, entering into that complicity between media and subject that is one of the film’s major themes.

I’ve always felt that _La dolce vita_ is one of the greatest of Fellini’s films. It comes without the tang of self-conscious now-I’m-going-to-make-a-masterpiece artsiness and self-indulgent autobiographical symbolism that mars the overrated _8½_ (1963). And aside from a few moments, it’s also refreshingly free of sentimentality. Fellini was able to harness the Hallmark side of his artistic character successfully only once – in _La strada_ (1954) – but it furs up the almost great _Amarcord_ (1973) and sugar-coats the emotion in _Nights of  
Cabiria_ (1957).

For me then, _La dolce vita_ is up there with _I vitelloni_ (1953) as _il maestro_’s most consummate performance. The two films have much in common: the blurring of actors’ and characters’ names; the theme of men who are lost and know it, but are too lazy, cynical or self-hating to do much about it; the _bella figura_ and modern attitudes that Italians still smarting from the war showed off in company, contrasted against the squalor, poverty and reactionary attitudes of their home and family lives; and above all, the loose, episodic structure.

Fellini was not a fantasist but an uncompromising Latin realist. This, he suggests, is how life flows: between meetings with friends in bars and billiard saloons, small flirtations and deceptions, full of plans for tonight and tomorrow night but without the clean dramatic structure that allows for much in the way of turning points or tragedies. Big moments are constantly undermined in both films, robbed of their place in the sun: Olga’s departure with her lover in  
_I vitelloni_ is only just caught by her brother Alberto as he rolls in drunk from a Carnevale party, having singularly failed to anticipate the event; in _La dolce vita_, the devastating drama of Marcello’s announcement to Steiner’s wife that her husband has killed himself and their two young children is turned into just another piece of media pornography by the flashes of the news photographers who have got there first – and, of course, by the fact that these photographers are friends of Marcello’s. He makes a living out of their carrion tactics.

Bumping into his film-critic friend Renzo Renzi at Cinecittà halfway through the shoot, Fellini complained that he didn’t feel he’d achieved the necessary artistic detachment from his material, saying: ‘It’s like describing a fuck to someone while you’re doing it.’ But this messiness is all a part of the film’s appeal. Co-screenwriters Tullio Pinelli and Ennio Flaiano (the latter one of the great unsung heroes of Italian cinema’s golden age) were working out as they went along how to detach a film’s structure from the usual Aristotelian dramatic arc and instead give it a more hybrid form – superficially like that of the newspapers that many of the stories recounted here were based on, but connected on a deeper level by a series of symbolic, thematic and moral resonances. Fellini, Pinelli and Flaiano were working towards film as fresco cycle rather than as narrative painting – an operation that would continue in debased form in the strand of Italian ‘magazine’ B movies popularised by _Mondo cane_ (1962), but which would also re-emerge (in more controlled, Aristotelian form) in contemporary multi-linear US dramas from _Magnolia_ to _Crash_.

As for what _La dolce vita_ is really about, well, one answer could be: varieties of modern damnation and salvation. Perhaps this is why the film has played less well, or been partly misunderstood, outside Catholic countries. Pauline Kael famously lumped it together with _La notte_ and _Last Year in Marienbad_ in her _Massachusetts Review_ essay ‘The Come-Dressed-as-the-Sick-Soul-of-Europe Parties’.

But Fellini’s film has none of the solemnity of those travelling companions. On one level it’s a savagely wry Dance of the Dead, a debased version of _Inferno_ in which Dante’s serious pilgrim is replaced by an ethically compromised chronicler who doesn’t so much observe and pity the damned as get into bed with them. Yet at the same time the film is imbued with the heady sense that an old, repressive order is changing. And we also feel that, however misguided and short-lived the protagonist’s attempts at redemption are, he might just one day find one that works and lasts. Or then again, he might not. Last time I watched the film, it suddenly struck me what this spirit of ‘hopeful farce’ reminded me of. It’s Chekhov, of course. _La dolce vita_ is one of the most truly Chekhovian films in the history of cinema.  
**Lee Marshall, _Sight and Sound_, May 2010**  
<br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE1NjE3NjE2MDZdfQ==
-->