
Disney and Pixar’s original feature film _Luca_ is a fun and heartwarming story about friendship, stepping out of your comfort zone and two teenage sea monsters who experience a life-changing summer. ‘This movie is about the friendships that change us,’ says director Enrico Casarosa. ‘It’s a love letter to the summers of our youth – those formative years when you’re finding yourself.’

Adds producer Andrea Warren, ‘It’s a magical coming-of-age-story about remembering the people who shaped us along the way.’

Set in a beautiful seaside town on the Italian Riviera, _Luca_ is a story about one boy experiencing an unforgettable summer filled with gelato, pasta and endless scooter rides. Luca shares these adventures with his newfound best friend, Alberto, but all the fun is threatened by a deeply held secret: they are both sea monsters from another world just below the water’s surface.

‘Luca is a shy, polite, introverted, rule-following kid who has a secret desire to see the world and learn all he can,’ says screenwriter Jesse Andrews. ‘But he’s been told his whole life that sea monsters should never go above the surface of the water where all the interesting stuff seems to be happening.’

So it’s no surprise that Luca harbours a secret fascination with all things human. His curiosity is especially sparked when he discovers items that have floated down from the surface. ‘Luca knows nothing of the surface,’ says screenwriter Mike Jones. ‘So these items are glimpses of another world – as if it were an object of an extraterrestrial landing on Earth. He’s a young imaginative kid, so when he meets Alberto – who has actual knowledge of these objects – it’s incredibly intriguing to Luca.’

Indeed, Alberto, a fellow sea monster, has ventured beyond the surface, making him the subject of intense respect as far as Luca is concerned – at least once he gets over the shock of it all. Because, it turns out, sea monsters have the ability to blend in with humans. ‘Alberto literally drags Luca out of the water, and we discover that these sea monsters have the magical ability to transform into human form when they’re dry,’ says Casarosa. ‘Our inspiration was sea life like octopuses that are able to camouflage and change the way they look.’

The result? Carte blanche to roam the land where humans dwell. And while Luca quite enjoys this freedom, he realises that the danger his family has warned him about is not entirely unfounded. ‘There’s a big misunderstanding between humans and sea monsters,’ says Jacob Tremblay, who lends his voice to Luca. ‘They all fear each other. Sea monsters strictly avoid the surface, and humans are eager to hunt down sea monsters and prove they exist.’

Luca and Alberto embrace their new surroundings with one caveat top of mind: stay dry. ‘If they get rained on or splashed, their secret could be revealed,’ says Jones.

Their sense of adventure – risks aside – is symbolised in large part by an image of a Vespa scooter that hangs in Alberto’s hideout. ‘It represents escape, freedom, friendship and the promise of exploring the amazing world around them,’ says Andrews.

The story, set in the late 1950s-early 1960s, captures the magic and adventure of summertime. The Italian seaside setting was created in a stunning painterly style Casarosa championed, and stems from his childhood. ‘I had the luck to grow up in Genoa – a port city on the Italian Riviera,’ he says. ‘It’s a very specific coast because it’s really steep – the mountains rise up from the ocean. The towns are stuck in time – they’re so picturesque. I always imagined them like little monsters coming out of the water.’

Hence sea monsters – though, to be fair, the underwater creatures in _Luca_ are not exactly scary – slimy, creepy creatures aren’t the director’s storytelling sensibility. ‘Sea monsters are a metaphor, really, for feeling different or excluded,’ says Casarosa. ‘I love the sense that all of our characters in some way feel different or unusual. Luca and Alberto so passionately want to be part of this other world – but they fear they won’t be accepted as they are. And yet, they love being sea monsters.’

Adds Warren, ‘There’s a lovely theme about wanting to be a part of something outside of our immediate families – wanting to experience cultures beyond our own. Luca discovers the power of exploring and celebrating another culture, while learning to honour and share his own.’

Inspired by the creatures from old maps dating back to the Renaissance, as well as scientific illustrations of fish from the region and Japanese dragons and serpents, artists created sea monsters that were believable, appealing and, importantly, expressive – because the story revolves around a burgeoning friendship between Luca and Alberto. ‘Their friendship brings out the best in Luca and gives him the confidence to spread his wings and take more risks,’ says executive producer Kiri Hart. ‘It’s an absolutely lovely, heartwarming story about friendship and how our friends can unlock certain parts of us, giving us the opportunity to discover something about ourselves.’  
**Production notes**

<![endif]-->

**LUCA**

_Directed by_: Enrico Casarosa  
©: Disney Enterprises Inc., Pixar  
_A_ Pixar Animation Studios _film_

_Presented by_: Disney  
_Executive Producers_: Pete Docter,  
Peter Sohn, Kiri Hart  
_Produced by_: Andrea Warren  
_Associate Producer_: William Reusch  
_Casting by_: Kevin Reher, Natalie Lyon  
_Screenplay by_: Jesse Andrews, Mike Jones  
_Story by_: Enrico Casarosa, Jesse Andrews,  
Simon Stephenson  
_Story Supervisors_: John Hoffman, Max Brace  
_Directors of Photography_: David Juan Bianchi,  
Kim White  
_Visual Effects Supervisor_: David Ryu  
_Animation Supervisor_: Michael Venturini  
_Directing Animators_: Claudio de Oliveira,  
Nickolas Rosario, Nate Wall  
_Film Editors_: Catherine Apple, Jason Hudak  
_Production Designer_: Daniela Strijleva  
_Character Designers_: Maria Yi, Daniel Holland, Jason Deamer  
_Set Designers_: Kristian Norelius,  
Nathaniel McLaughlin, Garrett Taylor,  
Noah Klocek, Philip Metschan  
_Music by_: Dan Romer  
_Original Dialogue Mixers_: Vince Caro,  
Adrian Maruri, Matt Smalley, Carlo Ricotta  
_Production Sound Editor_: Samuel Lehmer

_Voice Cast:_

Jacob Tremblay _(Luca Paguro)_  
Jack Dylan Grazer _(Alberto Scorfano)_  
Emma Berman _(Giulia Marcovaldo)_  
Saverio Raimondo _(Ercole Visconti)_  
Maya Rudolph _(Daniela Paguro)_  
Marco Barricelli _(Massimo Marcovaldo)_  
Jim Gaffigan _(Lorenzo Paguro)_  
Peter Sohn _(Ciccio)_  
Lorenzo Crisci _(Guido)_  
Marina Massironi _(Signora Marsigliese)_  
Gino La Monica _(Tommaso, old fisherman)_  
Sandy Martin _(Grandma Paguro)_  
Giacomo Gianniotti _(Giacomo, young fisherman)_  
Elisa Gabrielli _(Concetta Aragosta)_  
Mimi Maynard _(Pinuccia Aragosta)_  
Sacha Baron Cohen _(Uncle Ugo)_  
Francesca Fanti _(Maggiore, cop)_  
Jonathan Nichols _(priest)_  
Enrico Casarosa _(card player/angry fisherman)_  
Jim Pirri _(Mr Branzino)_

USA 2021©

91 mins

**CIAO ALBERTO**

_Director:_ McKenna Harris

USA 2021

8 mins

<![endif]-->

**MAKING MAGIC:  
100 YEARS OF DISNEY**

**Luca**

Wed 2 Aug 14:20; Mon 14 Aug 20:30;  
Sun 27 Aug 13:15

**Turning Red**

Wed 2 Aug 20:20; Tue 8 Aug 14:20;  
Sat 26 Aug 15:30

**The Jungle Book**

Thu 3 Aug 14:20; Sun 6 Aug 13:00;  
Wed 16 Aug 20:45; Wed 30 Aug 14:20

**Beaches** Thu 3 Aug 18:00; Sat 19 Aug 17:30

**20,000 Leagues Under the Sea**

Fri 4 Aug 18:00; Sun 13 Aug 18:10;  
Tue 22 Aug 14:20; Wed 23 Aug 20:20

**101 Dalmatians**

Sat 5 Aug 13:20; Thu 10 Aug 14:20;  
Sat 19 Aug 15:30; Tue 29 Aug 14:20

**Bedknobs and Broomsticks**

Sat 5 Aug 15:40; Thu 17 Aug 14:20;  
Sun 27 Aug 18:20

**Sister Act** Sat 5 Aug 20:40; Fri 18 Aug 18:20

**Zootropolis (aka Zootopia)  
**Sun 6 Aug 13:10; Fri 25 Aug 18:00

**Silent Cinema: Disney’s Silent Shorts + intro**

Sun 6 Aug 15:30

**Freaky Friday**

Sun 6 Aug 18:20; Fri 18 Aug 20:30;  
Thu 24 Aug 20:50

**The Parent Trap  
**Mon 7 Aug 18:00; Sun 20 Aug 15:10

**Pinocchio**

Wed 9 Aug 14:20; Sat 12 Aug 11:30 (+ extended intro); Mon 14 Aug 14:20; Sun 20 Aug 19:00

**Mary Poppins**

Wed 9 Aug 17:50; Mon 21 Aug 14:20;  
Mon 28 Aug 13:00

**Up** Wed 9 Aug 20:30; Mon 28 Aug 12:30

**The Love Bug**

Fri 11 Aug 20:30; Sat 12 Aug 11:50;  
Sun 20 Aug 13:30

**A Disney Day for Young Audiences**

Sat 12 Aug 11:30-16:30

**Tarzan** Sat 12 Aug 18:00; Sat 26 Aug 12:00

**Soul** Sat 12 Aug 20:30; Sat 19 Aug 13:00;  
Thu 24 Aug 14:20

**The Lion King**

Sun 13 Aug 13:00 (+ Funday Sing-along);  
Sat 26 Aug 20:30; Thu 31 Aug 14:20

**The Fiendishly Difficult Disney Quiz**

Sun 13 Aug 15:30 Blue Room

**Bambi**

Sun 13 Aug 15:50; Wed 16 Aug 14:20;  
Sat 26 Aug 12:20; Mon 28 Aug 16:20

**Finding Nemo  
**Sun 13 Aug 18:30; Sun 27 Aug 13:30

**The Rescuers  
**Mon 14 Aug 18:30; Sat 19 Aug 15:50

**Ratatouille** Sat 19 Aug 12:00; Tue 29 Aug 20:30

**Dick Tracy**

Fri 25 Aug 20:40; Tue 29 Aug 18:10 (+ intro by  
Ben Roberts, BFI CEO)

**The Little Mermaid  
**Sun 27 Aug 16:00; Mon 28 Aug 16:40

With thanks to The Walt Disney Company
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTY2MDIxODM5N119
-->