<![endif]-->

Adapting Joseph Kessel’s novel about a married bourgeois Parisienne led by idle curiosity to work afternoons in a high-class brothel, Buñuel consistently gives only scant indication as to what is real and what is part of her colourfully masochistic fantasy life. Eschewing sensationalism for cool discretion, he elicits marvellously nuanced performances from Catherine Deneuve as the perversely innocent Séverine and from Piccoli as Husson, her perversely principled womanising suitor.

bfi.org.uk

Most of all, Buñuel wanted to go back to work in Spain again. He had been encouraged by reports that the brouhaha over _Viridiana_ had calmed, that censorship there had been relaxed. He returned. Then, after months of preparation, in the summer of 1963, Franco’s government refused the shooting authorisation for his version of Galdos’ _Tristana_. Later that year, in France, he made one of his finest films, _The Diary of a Chambermaid_. When shown in Paris, in 1964, it was coolly received. A year later, one of his old pet projects, an adaptation of Lewis’s _The Monk_, was finally about to take shape. At the last minute the production company was dissolved, and it too had to be written off. The Hakim Brothers then approached Buñuel to ask him to consider a screen version of Joseph Kessel’s novel, _Belle de Jour_. He accepted, and cloistered himself in an ultra-modern building in Madrid with Jean-Claude Carrière (co-scenarist on _Diary_ and _The Monk_). They finished the script in five weeks. The shooting schedule for this, Buñuel’s 27th film, was ten weeks. He brought it in in eight.

_Belle de Jour_ is a masterpiece, technically Buñuel’s most accomplished, free-flowing work. It is unique, the only one of his films in which his obsessions, his purity, and his convulsive spirit have all been fully, satisfactorily organised into an architectonic whole. It unfolds so smoothly, with such sustained legato, that there is no chance to catch a breath. _Viridiana_ was a step in this direction, the underrated _Diary_ a near-arrival. _Belle_ is the many-faceted and perfect Golden Bowl which crowns a life’s work. When released in Paris recently, it was greeted with shock, reticence and disappointment by most of the critics for the daily and weekly papers. The great man, tired, deaf, 67 years old and alcoholic (his own admission), now only wants to return to Mexico and rest.

Joseph Kessel’s novel, published in 1929, whipped up a fair _succès de scandale_ at the time. Although Buñuel has said of it: ‘La novela no me gusta nada,’ it is a far from uninteresting book, firmly in the tradition of the French _roman psychologique_, and a precursor of the post-war, but already classic _Histoire d’O_. It concerns a beautiful young _grande bourgeoise_, Séverine Serizy, wife of a handsome young surgeon (Pierre) whom she deeply loves. She has every reason to be happy, but of course isn’t. She learns that an acquaintance, a woman of her own class, is working in a brothel. Séverine gradually becomes obsessed by the thought of such a situation, finds out the address of one of these bagnios, and applies for a job there. She only works afternoons from two to five – thus her sobriquet, Belle de Jour. Frigid in the arms of her kindly, well-behaved husband, she is impelled by a masochistic urge for humiliation which leads her to seek out ‘rough trade’. Marcel, a doting young gangster, falls in love with her; she soon becomes very fond of him. The devoted hoodlum attempts to kill a friend of her husband who is about to inform Pierre of Séverine’s double life. The murder misfires when Pierre intervenes, and it is he who is seriously wounded. He recovers, but is paralysed, condemned to a wheelchair. Overcome by guilt, Séverine confesses everything. Pierre never speaks to her again.

Kessel elevates this novelettish plot through a convincing portrayal of the frightening divorce between the heart and the senses. In 1936, Philippe Hériat adapted the book for the stage. The play was rejected by 16 theatre directors and as many actresses. It is a sentimental watering-down of the novel, with an unconvincing happy ending. It has never been performed; with luck, it never will be.

Although Buñuel does not fancy the novel (he didn’t like Defoe’s _Robinson Crusoe_ much either), he stated: ‘I found it interesting to try to make something I would like, starting from something I didn’t ... I enjoyed complete freedom during the shooting of _Belle_, and consider myself entirely responsible for the result.’ He took pains with the editing, modifying several sequences in the process – a procedure rare for him. Hindered often in the past by tight budgets, his only inconvenience here was the producers’ insidious auto-censorship; several cuts were made by them before _Belle_ was sent to  
the censors.

Buñuel’s last great film is close in spirit to his first great film, _L’Age d’Or_. Indeed, one of the things in _Belle de Jour_ which seems to have bothered people is its fidelity to what can only be called the true spirit of surrealism: not the tacky Surrealism to be found in the moth-eaten commemorative art shows which have popped up from time to time in Paris, London or New York art galleries since the war, but the invigorating, positive, liberating surrealism which marked _L’Age d’Or_, caused riots when that film was first shown, and resulted in its being banned for a generation. The result is more mellow, less overtly aggressive than _L’Age d’Or_, even calm. But it is all there.

Buñuel: ‘_Belle de Jour_ is a pornographic film ... by that I mean _chaste_ eroticism.’

Elliott Stein, _Sight and Sound_, Autumn 1967
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTIxMDQ5OTAzNjhdfQ==
-->