


<![endif]-->

When Andy leaves his bedroom, his toys come to life. Favoured toy Woody is forced to confront his own shelf date with the arrival of a new, top-of-the-market space ranger called Buzz Lightyear. The rest, as far as this landmark film is concerned, is history.

Back in 1937, Walt Disney delighted audiences and changed cinema history with _Snow White_. Some 60 years later, Pixar Studios did the same with  
_Toy Story_, working with state-of-the-art technologies but always ensuring that story remained at the heart of the work.

bfi.org.uk

**Director Rowan Woods pays tribute to ‘Toy Story’**

When you’re the parent of a toddler you’re at their mercy when it comes to choosing films. Most of they want to watch is absolute rubbish, so it’s a wonderful surprise and relief when something comes along that you too can watch over and over again.

John Lasseter’s _Toy Story_ only gets better with repeated viewings. The story is almost perfect – it has a marvellous circular logic. It also puts an unusual spin on the buddy movie. Unlike in most kids’ stories, the two human characters – a good boy called Andy whose toys are lost out in the world trying to get home, and a bad boy called Sid who lives next door and dismembers his toys hover on the perimeter of the buddy story, which involves two toys: Woody and Buzz. The human characters deliver the film’s conventional message – be nice to your fellow man, be nice to your toys – but it’s the relationship between the toys that’s at the film’s centre.

And there’s an amazing support cast – all the other toys. They are beautifully formed characters, complicated and well drawn. There are stacks of smart jokes of the kind you find in _The Simpsons_, but they travel further than most _Simpsons_ jokes because they don’t rely merely on a cool adult understanding but also function as sight gags for the kids. The sense of humour is on the innocent side of _The Simpsons_, but nevertheless it contains many references to popular culture of the last 30 years references Generation-X parents pickup on. Of course all this works very cleverly in relation to the merchandising of the film. You’re sucked into the huge spin-offs from the movie, but I’ve found to my surprise that I don’t have a problem with this because I love the characters so much. Call me naïve, but I was the first waiting at the counter to look at the Buzz and Woody dolls.

I also like the fact that _Toy Story_ is a boydoll story. It’s a modem fairy tale for boys. Buzz and Woody aren’t boy dolls with guns – in fact the whole premise of the two central characters is that they are toys with no power beyond the fact that they are toys. In a sense they’re like real people as opposed to action heroes, or ordinary toys as opposed to action toys which can do anything, perform any function.

The film displays a perfect symmetry of form. Andy and Sid both have baby sisters who play a key role in the way they behave in that how you treat your sibling often reflects the way you treat the rest of the world. You never get a full view of their parents. You catch glimpses of Andy’s mother, leaving us to suppose that she’s a single mother and a very industrious single mother at that who has done the right thing in terms of parenting because her son is so well behaved. In Sid’s family you hear the mother but you also see only one parent – the fat, bulbous knee of the father who is watching television.

_Toy Story_, _The Wizard of Oz_ and the Wallace and Gromit videos occupy my shelves alongside more highbrow choices. I always analyse the story logic and characters of my favourite films to try to work out what it is I really like about them. And I can say without reservation that _Toy Story_ has more clever story tricks and operates on more levels than my favourite Cassavetes and Scorsese movies. Though it works as a kid’s film, it doesn’t follow a predictable Hollywood pattern and it manages to break a few rules along the road, as in the way it places its two human characters outside the central adventure.

_Toy Story_ is very cunningly structured and exploits to the full the freedom a work that breaks out of the confines of the real world allows. In my own films, the textures and sensibilities are dictated by the fact that the stories reference culture directly. My film _The Boys_ could be seen as a slice-of-life drama, but I’m also interested in pursuing the kind of structures and complexity we don’t usually associate with such dramas, in which to a great extent the story is dictated by the material.

Buzz and Woody’s central dilemma is how to find their way home. They have other problems too, of course, to do with knowing themselves and coming to terms with who they are: Woody has to overcome feelings of inadequacy and jealousy, while Buzz has to accept the fact that he’s a toy, that he is powerless.

_Toy Story_ presents a very accurate picture of suburbia. Andy’s house is a place of enclosure and safety for the toys, but outside is a place of great danger where even the most anodyne of things appears threatening. There’s a real inside/outside dynamic that is beautifully woven into the structure of the movie.

There are many great scenes, but one I particularly enjoy is where Buzz has just realised that he really is a toy (having seen a commercial for himself on television). He’s in a state of terrible despair and then he is grabbed by Sid’s sister, who dresses him up and plays with him in a tea-party situation. She leaves and Woody arrives to find Buzz sitting at the party completely drunk on tea. Woody starts to try to persuade Buzz that there really is hope. It’s a beautiful scene.

Another great moment occurs earlier in the movie when Andy’s plastic soldiers go on a reconnaissance mission downstairs to find out what new toys Andy has received for his birthday. They report back to Woody via a walkie-talkie. There’s a point when the soldiers have to be still and they form an elaborate military statue. There’s also a wonderful scene where Woody and Buzz go to the pizza parlour and end up in an arcade game: a rocket full of martians which has a giant claw operated by whoever is playing the game. To the martians the rocket is their whole world and the claw is God, and they’re pleading ‘Choose me!’ I love the idea that the toy community is a complex hierarchy of groups and sub-groups. What amazes me about _Toy Story_ is that the jokes play out at a miniature level – they’re over in a split second – while whole scenes are jokes in themselves. It’s so impressive – and the more you watch it the more you see.  
**Rowan Woods talking to Leslie Felperin, _Sight and Sound_, January 1999**  

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTI1NjUwNTgwNV19
-->