
_+ Q&A with cast Lindsay Duncan, Clarke Peters, Sue Johnston, writer  Iain Weatherby, co-creator Charlie Covell and director Chloë Wicks.  Chaired by Miranda Sawyer._

_Truelove_ is a unique spin on a cat and mouse thriller, centering on a gang of older friends who make a pact that, if and when the time comes, rather than let each other suffer a dreadful decline they will engineer a more dignified death as a sign of ‘Truelove’. But when an intrepid young police officer discovers that there is more to this group of retirees than meets the eye, events soon take a surprising and dangerous turn…

With a core cast in their 70s, _Truelove_ offers a refreshingly different take on older age, with its thrilling twists, wry sense of humour, and a passionate love story at its heart, celebrating second chances and the idea that it’s never too late. Meanwhile underpinning all of this is the knottiest of moral questions – is it ever right to help end of life?

Filming took place across Bristol, Somerset and Wales with support from local Film Offices.

**About the panel**

**Lindsay Duncan** is a Tony and Olivier award winning actress, renowned for her extensive career both on stage and screen. Film credits include the Oscar and Golden Globe award-winning film _Birdman_ alongside Michael Keaton, Marc Webb’s _Gifted_, Roger Michell’s _Le Weekend_, Richard Curtis’ _About Time_ starring alongside Bill Nighy, and Tim Burton’s _Alice through the Looking Glass_. On television Lindsay has recently appeared in Apple TV’s _The Morning Show_. Other appearances include; as Ysabeau De Clermont in Sky One’s _A Discovery of Witches, His Dark Materials_, as Clementine Churchill in _Churchill’s Secret_, Frau Bellinghaussen in Stephen Poliakoff’s _Closer to the Enemy_, Grace in HBO’s critically acclaimed _The Leftovers_ and Lady Smallwood in BBC’s award-winning _Sherlock_.

Not only is Lindsay recognised for her work on screen but she is also admired for her work on stage. Throughout her extensive career Lindsay has appeared on stages all over the UK, in the West End and on Broadway. Lindsay most recently appeared in Strindberg’s _The Dance of Death_ for the Arcola Theatre. Before this, she appeared at the National Theatre in _Hansard_, a new play by Simon Wood, as Claire in _A Delicate Balance_ on Broadway, on London’s West End as Judith Bliss in _Hay Fever_ directed by Howard Davies, and as Amanda Prynne in _Private Lives_ alongside Alan Rickman for which she won a Tony, Olivier, Variety Club, Drama Desk and Critics Circle award for Best Actress. Lindsay was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 2009 for her services to Drama.

**Clarke Peters** is an actor and director, well-known for playing Lester Freamon on HBO TV series _The Wire_, as well as Albert Lambreaux on _Treme_. Recent credits include; _I Wanna Dance with Somebody_, _The Man Who Fell to Earth_ (Showtime/CBS), _The Irregulars_ (Netflix), Spike Lee’s _Da 5 Bloods_ (for which he was nominated for 2021 BAFTA and NAACP Image awards), _His Dark Materials_ (HBO), AMC series _La Fortuna_, and _Foundation_ (Apple+).  His film credits include _Three Billboards Outside Ebbing Missouri, Harriet, Mona Lisa,_ and _John Wick._ Aside from his acting credits, Clarke is also an accomplished director and musical book writer, most notably for _Five Guys Named Joe._ He recently finished filming the TV mini-series _Eric_, opposite Benedict Cumberbatch.

BAFTA-nominated and OBE **Sue Johnston** rose to fame after playing Sheila Grant in the well-loved series _Brookside_ and then went on to play the iconic roles of Barbara Royle in _The Royle Family_, Dr Grace Foley in the award-winning BBC series _Waking the Dead_, Gloria Price in Britain’s long-adored ITV series _Coronation_ _Street_ and of course Miss Denker in _Downton_ _Abbey_. Sue’s more recent credits include _Witness Number Three_ for Story Films/Channel 5, Jimmy McGovern’s _Time_ on BBC alongside Sean Bean and Stephen Graham, Channel 4’s _The_ _Help_ with Jodie Comer and popular comedy series _The_ _Cockfields_. Sue will next be seen in Ben Wheatley’s latest series _Generation_ _Z_. Aside from her extensive work on screen, Sue is also an accomplished theatre actress. Sue was appointed OBE in the 2009 Queen's Birthday Honours for services to Drama and to Charity.

**Iain Weatherby** wrote with longtime collaborator Charlie Covell on Channel Four’s _Humans_ and has been in writers’ rooms for _Temple_ (Sky) and for _Kaos_ (Netflix). He is writing episodes of the Dutch thriller _Safe Harbor_ for Mark Williams (_Ozark_) and his comedy drama _Boxes_ is in development with Channel Four. A feature script _Hollywood_ _Berlin_, about German emigrés in LA in 1941, is being produced by Slate Entertainment. In the real world Iain has worked in advertising and finance and serves as a trustee of the Charlie Waller Trust, a mental health charity. He lives in rural Dorset.

**Charlie Covell** is a London-based writer and actor who worked with Clerkenwell Films on the BAFTA-winning Channel 4/Netflix series _The End of the F***ing World_: Charlie wrote all episodes and served as an executive producer on the second season. Alongside _Truelove_, Charlie is currently showrunning an 8-part series – _Kaos_ – for Netflix, which is due to be out next year. They’re also writing a new feature film version of _Pippi Longstocking_ for Heyday Films/Studio Canal.

**Chloë Wicks**’ recent directing work includes _The Flatshare_ (Paramount+) and _On the Edge: Cradled_ (Channel 4), which won the TV Foundation’s Victor Adebodun prize for debut director. Chloë’s debut feature as a writer/director is currently in development with Film4.

**Miranda Sawyer (chair)** is an English journalist and broadcaster. Besides her features and radio criticism for _The Observer_, her writing has appeared in _GQ_, _Vogue_ and _The_ _Guardian_. She is a regular arts critic in print, on television and on radio. Her most recent book, _Out of Time_, was published by Fourth Estate/HarperCollins. She is currently writing her third book to be published in 2024. She broadcasts on Radio 4 and for _The Culture Show_ (BBC TV). She is on the board of Tate Members, the South London Gallery and Sound Women.
<br><br>

**TRUELOVE (EPISODE 1)**<br>

_Director:_ Chloe Wicks<br>

_Production Company:_ Clerkenwell Films<br>

_Writer, Co-Creator & Executive Producer:_  
Iain Weatherby<br>

_Co-Creator & Executive Producer:_ Charlie Covell<br>

_Producer:_ Alex Walsh-Taylor<br>

_Executive Producers for Clerkenwell Films:_Petra Fried, Emily Harrison, Andy Baker<br>

_Associate Executive Producer for Clerkenwell Films:_  Charlie Langdell<br>

_Cast:_<br>

Lindsay Duncan _(Phil)_<br>

Clarke Peters _(Ken)_<br>

Sue Johnston _(Marion)_<br>

Phil Davis _(Nigel)_<br>

Peter Egan _(David)_<br>

Karl Johnson  _(Tom)_<br>

Fiona Button  _(Kate)_

Kiran Sonia Sawar _(Ayesha)_

UK 2023

47 mins

Digital

Total running time: 110 mins
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTgyMDg1ODM5MF19
-->