

_Introduced by journalist and programmer Leigh Singer (Wednesday 21 June only)._

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

It is hard now to credit that there was a time when Carol Reed was seriously touted as the world’s greatest living director. Still, watching _The Third Man_ (or rather re-watching it for the umpteenth time), the idea does not seem quite so fantastic. Of all his films, this is the one where every element people, place, subject matter – seems to have come together in one flawless, preordained package.

It wasn’t so, of course. Like so many sanctified movie classics, _The Third Man_ nearly did not happen that way at all, and somewhere in the same alternative universe that harbours a _Casablanca_ starring Ronald Reagan and Ann Sheridan there lurks a project called _Night in Vienna_, with a conventional symphonic score by William Alwyn and starring Noël Coward as Harry Lime. Luckily Reed ignored the egregious advice of David Selznick (‘Who the hell is going to a film called _The Third Man_?’), unearthed Anton Karas from a Viennese nightclub, talked the hypochondriac Welles into risking pneumonia in the sewers – and created what’s generally hailed as one of the few undisputed masterpieces of British cinema.

Undisputed, that is, except by those who question its Britishness on the theory that Welles dominated the direction of the film just as his character (on screen for barely 15 minutes) dominates the action. That Welles wrote most of his own dialogue (including the famous ‘cuckoo-clock’ speech lifted from Molnar), is not in doubt, nor that he suggested a few setups and camera angles. But the stylistic affinities with Reed’s other great night-town film, _Odd Man Out_ (1946), the slick black streets, melodramatic lighting and grotesque, tilted framings, are close enough to show that if Reed was influenced by Welles’s style, it had happened well before they worked together on _The Third Man_.

What Welles did bring to the film besides his finest performance outside his own work – was an obsession he shared with Greene: the preoccupation with betrayal and lost innocence. In _The Third Man_ this theme, which recurs in the work of both men, gains through their collaboration an intensity that transforms the film from the ‘simple entertainment’ Greene claimed to have intended into something far harsher and more poignant. ‘He never grew up. The world grew up around him,’ says Anna, speaking of Harry Lime, but the same goes for Holly Martins. Their similar first names (Anna several times confuses them) mark them out as mirror images, twin retarded adolescents locked into their boyhood patterns of mutual dependence and betrayal. In the novella of  
_The Third Man_ (not the source of the script, but Greene’s preparation for it), Calloway reflects, ‘Evil was like Peter Pan – it carried with it the horrifying and horrible gift of eternal youth.’ Welles’ playing of the Prater Wheel scene conveys, behind its surface jauntiness, a sense of that same horror – the emptiness of the moral abyss.

The accusation commonly levelled at Reed, that as a director he was only as good as his collaborators, may paradoxically be borne out by the excellence of _The Third Man_, since here he had the best. Not only Greene and Welles, but Korda (who came up with the original idea), Karas, Robert Krasker’s cinematography – and the shattered city of Vienna itself. Karas’ score may be cheap music but (as that _Third Man_ manqué, Noël Coward, reminded us) cheap music can be very potent, and the zither’s plangent, wheedling tone, its brittle gaiety and air of false bonhomie, perfectly captures the weary, insinuating zeitgeist of post-war Vienna. Krasker (who had also photographed _Odd Man Out_) turns the ruined city, where wedding-cake baroque cohabits with rubble, into a setting for Grand Opera, a latter-day _Götterdämmerung_. Welles’ first appearance, the white face looming out of the pitch-black doorway, has become justly famous, but his final entrance is equally impressive: doubly elevated, at the top of the frame and high on a mountain of rubble, his dark-coated figure looms over the wounded body of Vienna like a demon king. In _The Third Man_ melodrama attains sublimity.

But it would have remained mere melodrama had it not been shot on location. Perhaps it took a filmmaker hailing, like Reed, from another war-shattered city to see Vienna (as Rossellini did Berlin in _Germany Year Zero_) as so telling an index of the intolerable burden of post-war guilt. The sour decadence of the dismembered city, its professional charm worn precariously thin, infects the whole film, including the casting. _The Third Man_ is superbly cast, down to its smallest role – even the elegant, resentful lady toted around by Wilfrid Hyde-White's British Council official is precisely characterised, though she never speaks a word – but it gains immeasurably from its use of Austrian actors. There’s a painful authenticity about Ernst Deutsch’s phony aristo, with his agonised, ingratiating smile, or Paul Hoerbiger as the ill-fated porter, that suggests direct personal experience of what they’re enacting.

The most imaginative casting coup, though, is the eerie goblin-child Hansel (Herbert Halbik), a being conjured up, with his Grimm Brothers name, from the darkest forest-bound recesses of the Teutonic psyche. Moon-faced and appallingly unlovable, with the blank accusing gaze of one who has seen too much too young, he seems – even more than Harry Lime himself – to embody the malign, corrupted spirit of the city.

‘Death’s at the bottom of everything,’ says Trevor Howard’s trench-coated cop. _The Third Man_, a film set between two funerals (both of them for the same man) is haunted, permeated by death. Yet like Lime, a killer of the worst kind whom it’s impossible to dislike (and who achieved posthumous rehabilitation as hero of a popular television series), the film’s disenchanted romanticism exerts an irresistible charm. After all these years, that charm hasn’t diminished in the least.  
**Philip Kemp, _Sight and Sound_, April 1994**  
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTczNDMwMTUwXX0=
-->