---
layout: post
title: 23 Seconds to Eternity
published: true
date: 2023-11-04
readtime: true
categories: ['DESTINATION TIME TRAVEL<br>PLAYING WITH TIME IN FILM AND TV']
tags: [Talks]
metadata: 
pdf: '2023-11-04-tardis.pdf'
---


_+ Q&A with producer/director Bill Butt_

_23 Seconds to Eternity_ will take viewers on a film journey through the collected music videos and short features produced and directed by Bill Butt in collaboration with Jimmy Cauty and Bill Drummond in their various guises as The JAMs, The KLF and The Timelords, one of the most successful, subversively creative and enigmatic electronic bands of the early 90s. This release is the first ever compilation of KLF Communication’s films and includes previously unreleased material along with an illustrated booklet.

The KLF became the biggest selling singles act in the world in 1991 with a series of international smash hits including acid house anthems ‘3 A.M. Eternal’, ‘Last Train to Transcentral’ and ‘Justified & Ancient’, released on their own KLF Communications record label.

_23 Seconds to Eternity_ includes the film _The White Room_ (1989), an ‘ambient road movie’ following American police car Ford Timelord and Jimmy Cauty (Rockman Rock) and Bill Drummond (King Boy D) on a journey cross-country in search of the ‘White Room’. Remastered and regraded from the only existing film print, _The White Room_ features a new soundtrack specially recorded for this Blu-ray/DVD release. _23 Seconds to Eternity_ also features a newly restored version of _The Rites of Mu_ (1991), a 29-minute feature narrated by Martin Sheen, documenting a summer solstice event organised by The KLF on the Scottish island of Jura in 1991, plus the previously unreleased short _Krash_ (1992), edited in 2022, a record of the final and violent destruction of Ford Timelord. The soundtrack to _Krash_ is a track from _The Black Room_, the unreleased album by the Justified Ancients of Mu Mu.

_23 Seconds to Eternity_ brings together the music videos for the hit singles ‘Doctorin’ the Tardis’ (1988) by The Timelords, ‘It’s Grim Up North’ (1991) by The JAMs and the rarely seen Kylie Said to Jason (1989), as well as the Stadium House Trilogy featuring the KLF’s international hits during 1990/91,  
‘3 A.M. Eternal’, ‘Last Train to Trancentral’ and ‘What Time Is Love?’, plus the single ‘Justified & Ancient’ (1991) featuring lead vocals by ‘The First Lady of Country’ Miss Tammy Wynette. Released in the UK in March 1992 to celebrate the 1,000th anniversary of the discovery of America by The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu in the year 992, the music video _America: What Time Is Love?_ is a guitar-heavy techno-metal version of their 1990 anthem. Shot on the James Bond stage at Pinewood, the film includes a Viking longship (acquired by Bill Butt) and submarine, with vocals from Glenn Hughes (of Deep Purple). It was the fifth and final top five single by the KLF in the UK.

**About The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu and The KLF**  
The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu (The JAMs for short) was formed in London in 1987 by Jimmy Cauty (Rockman Rock) and Bill Drummond (King Boy D). Their rap, rhyme and scratch approach to making music was the first to totally make use of the cheap sampling and computer technology newly available in the UK. Beginning in 1988 their ‘pure trance’ singles (as The KLF) and series of remixes went on to become anthems at huge summer raves at which The KLF became a regular ‘live’ attraction blasting their audiences with polystyrene pellets, cornflakes and Scottish pound notes. The duo became known for their creative and liberal use of sampling and pioneered ‘stadium house’ – rave music with a pop-rock production and sampled crowd noise. Their 1990 LP, Chill Out, defined the ‘ambient house’ genre.

Adopting the philosophy espoused by Robert Shea and Robert Anton Wilson’s esoteric novels, the Illuminatus! Trilogy, The KLF embraced the chaos and contradictions of discordianism and situationist ideas to create anarchic situation-based manifestations, including the defacement of billboards and public buildings with graffiti, the posting of cryptic advertisements and unusual live performances. Their performance in collaboration with Extreme Noise Terror at the BRIT Awards in February 1992 ended with the announcement: ‘Ladies and Gentlemen, The KLF have now left the music business’ and, in May of that year, they deleted their entire back-catalogue, including their related video releases.

**About Bill Butt**

Bill Butt met Bill Drummond when they were both 17 at Northampton Art School. Bill Butt later studied stage design at Bristol Old Vic Theatre School and worked as a stage and lighting designer for Echo and the Bunnymen, and The Teardrop Explodes, moving on to producing and directing short films for both bands. Bill Butt produced and directed over 50 music videos and shorts between 1981 and 1993, working for artists including Texas, Pete Wylie, Feargal Sharkey, Emerson, Lake, and Palmer and Big Country, as well as on all the related KLF films. He has twice been nominated for best video of the year at the Brit Awards. Bill Butt was the series producer on _Eyewitness_ (1993), a nature and science television series produced by the BBC and DK Vision for PBS in the US, where he met Martin Sheen, who narrated the US version of the series, and who went on to narrate _The Rites of Mu_. _Eyewitness Skeleton_ won an Emmy in the USA.

In 1999 Bill Butt was nominated for a BAFTA for his work as director on the ‘Sharks’ episode of Nigel Marven _Giants_ series. The filming was extreme and featured Nigel free swimming outside the cage with white sharks in ‘Shark Ally’ South Africa and being ‘crowd mobbed’ by reef sharks during a night dive in the Bahamas. While filming whale sharks in Exmouth, Western Australia, Cyclone Vance devastated the town. Despite some damage to the kit and themselves, the crew stayed to film the cyclone and its devastation. Bill Butt has been a voting member of BAFTA since 1999.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE4MDkyMzExNjJdfQ==
-->