



_Fantasia_ opens with Deems Taylor, better known to 1940 audiences as a radio broadcaster than a composer, walking on stage amid a tuning-up orchestra. As _Fantasia_’s host, he explains that this animated feature won’t tell a single story; rather, it will be a series of classical music pieces set to animation. (_Fantasia_’s working title was  
_The Concert Feature_.) What we’ll see, Taylor says, ‘are the designs and pictures and stories that music inspired in the minds and imaginations of a group of artists. In other words, they are not going to be the interpretations of trained musicians… which I think is all to the good.’

The film, however, is blatantly seeking musical legitimacy. Its conductor is Leopold Stokowski, a tawny-haired maestro star and proven screen property who’d appeared in the 1937 musical comedy _One Hundred Men and a Girl_, featuring Deanna Durbin. We mostly just see the great man’s illumined back as he leads us into _Fantasia_’s animation. The first sequence is a semi-abstract piece, set to Stokowski’s symphonic rendering of Bach’s ‘Toccata and Fugue’. The on-screen ripples and contrails are linear simplifications of the work of Oskar Fischinger, a German avant-garde animator.

Then come dances from Tchaikovsky’s ‘Nutcracker Suite’: flower fairies, sultry goldfish and Art Babbitt’s famous nodding mushrooms (on-screen for barely a minute). After that, with apologies to Stokowski, comes _Fantasia_’s true icon: Mickey Mouse as Dukas’ ‘Sorcerer’s Apprentice’, overwhelmed by his army of water-bearing broomsticks. Stravinsky’s ‘Rite of Spring’ takes place on an early Earth of volcanoes, evolution and dinosaurs. Then there’s a cherub-strewn version of Beethoven’s ‘Pastoral Symphony’, more on which below; and a burlesque of Ponchielli’s ‘Dance of the Hours’, with ballerina ostriches, hippos, elephants and alligators. Damned souls caper in hellfire for a colossal Devil, to the screaming strings of Mussorgsky’s ‘Night on Bald Mountain’. Dawn segues into a secularised ‘Ave Maria’ (Schubert) where the Madonna – after much indecision on Walt’s part – doesn’t show.

_Fantasia_’s critical reputation is mostly the centaurettes’ fault, those half-horse, half-female fancies, disporting themselves round Mount Olympus in the Pastoral segment. In 1995, Britain’s Channel 4 screened a muckraking documentary called _Secret Lives: Walt Disney_. With admirable precision, it homed in on the centaurettes. ‘(_Fantasia_’s) banal, often tacky imagery came as a disappointment to many,’ explained the narration. ‘The heads of Disneyfied American teenagers are grafted onto the bodies of centaurs… On seeing this, (Walt) Disney was impressed. He said, “Gee, this’ll make Beethoven.”’

Actually, the Beethoven comment came from a story meeting prior to the animation, and no ‘Gee’ was transcribed. (Neal Gabler quotes the line in his Disney biography.) But such smears were part of a fight Walt had picked himself, setting the ordinary American (that is, himself) against the stuffed shirts of the music establishment.

  
‘We figured that if ordinary folk like ourselves could find entertainment in the visualisations of so-called classical music, so would the average audience…’ Walt said after _Fantasia_’s release. ‘I imagine that the 1200 young people in my organisation who helped make _Fantasia_ are a pretty fair cross-section of average American culture. They’re from the average American home with the average American advantages and upbringing. Every day I see them prove they know the difference between the real stuff and the phoney.’

The populism both provoked and pre-empted a blunt response from Igor Stravinsky, the only living composer represented in _Fantasia_. He declared, ‘The mass add nothing to art.’ Well, _Fantasia_ may not be art, though the label fits it surely closer than ‘kitsch,’ which reviewers wave at the film like a talisman. For what is clear is that, within the hand-drawn form, _Fantasia_’s scope and spectacle are matchless.

In ‘Rite of Spring’, for example, we wander through space to a molten Earth where volcanoes blast like ships’ funnels. From macrocosm to underbrush: the ‘Nutcracker’ is a waterborne ballroom of whirling blossoms, cascades of dancing thistle-men. Gibbous legions swarm round Bald Mountain; one reviewer described them as mad sperm. Dance of the Hours’ bestial ballet ends in zigzag insanity, with the ’gators riding ostriches and twirling hippos on their scales.

Walt publicly thanked Stokowski and Taylor for ‘holding my head up when the water got too deep.’ But doesn’t Mickey command water with the stolen Sorcerer’s hat? No, he only dreams he does, when it threatens to drown him (later, it drowns the whole Earth). After his omnipotent master saves the day, everyman Mickey gives his cheesiest grin in the film’s most Disney moment. But the Sorcerer cocks his brow like Walt. Is Walt him, Mickey, or both? The question exercised critics, who noted that _Fantasia_ was made when Walt was at the height of his hubris, and rushing into calamity.

The scowling Sorcerer, who conjures great butterflies into being and parts the waters like Moses, is a power-sibling to Stokowski on his podium, Zeus throwing down his thunderbolts and even Chernabog, the devil of Bald Mountain, toying with the damned in his giant hands. But there are gentler magicians, more in line with the Disney we know, like the Nutcracker flower-fairy who yawns, lounges and lights up a spiderweb. Then there are the heroes without magic: the perky little mushroom, captivatingly out of step with his peers; the bold foal-Pegasus, chasing a rainbow to its underwater roots; and the animal ballerinas who spoof a spoof through the sheer beauty of their dance-steps. Chuck Jones mocked _Fantasia_’s hubris in his Wagnerian cartoon _What’s Opera Doc?_, but ‘Dance of the Hours’ had beaten him at his parodic game.  
**Andrew Osmond, _100 Animated Feature Films_ (BFI/Palgrave Macmillan, 2010)**  
<br>

<![endif]-->

**TOOT WHISTLE PLUNK AND BOOM**

_Directors:_ C. August Nichols, Ward Kimball

_©:_ Walt Disney Productions

_Production Company:_ Walt Disney Productions

_Story by:_ Dick Humer

_Colour Styling:_ Eyvind Earle

_Character Styling:_ Tom Oreb

_Animation:_ Ward Kimball, Julius Svendsen,

Marc Davis, Henry Tanous, Art Stevens,

Xavier Afencio

_Art Director:_ A. Kendall O’Connor

_Assistant Art Director:_ Victor Haboush

_Music:_ Joseph Dubin

_Songs:_ Sonny Burke, Jack Elliott

_Voice cast:_

Bill Thompson _(Professor Owl)_

USA 1952©, 10 mins

**FANTASIA**

_Production Supervision:_ Ben Sharpsteen

_©:_ Walt Disney Productions

_Producer:_ Walt Disney

_Story Direction:_ Joe Grant, Dick Huemer

_Camera Operator:_ Chuck Wheeler *

_Colour by:_ Technicolor

_Musical Direction:_ Edward H. Plumb

_Musical Film Editor:_ Stephen Csillag

_Recording:_ William E. Garity, C.O. Slyfield,

J.N.A. Hawkins

_Sound System:_ RCA Sound Recording

_With:_

Leopold Stokowski _(conductor)_

The Philadelphia Orchestra

Deems Taylor _(narrative introductions)_

**Toccata and Fugue in D Minor**

_–_ Johann Sebastian Bach

_Direction:_ Samuel Armstrong

_Story Development:_ Lee Blair, Elmer Plummer,

Phil Dike

_Art Direction:_ Robert Cormack

_Background Paintings:_ Joe Stahley, John Hench, Nino Carbe

_Animation:_ Cy Young, Art Palmer,

Daniel MacManus, George Rowley,

Edwin Aardal, Joshua Meador, Cornett Wood

**The Nutcracker Suite**

_–_ Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky

_Direction:_ Samuel Armstrong

_Story Development:_ Sylvia Moberly-Holland, Norman Wright, Albert Heath, Bianca Majolie, Graham Heid

_Character Designs:_ John Walbridge,

Elmer Plummer, Ethel Kulsar

_Art Direction:_ Robert Cormack, Al Zinnen,

Curtiss D. Perkins, Arthur Byram, Bruce Bushman

_Background Paintings:_ John Hench, Ethel Kulsar, Nino Carbe

_Animation:_ Art Babbitt, Les Clark, Don Lusk,

Cy Young, Robert Stokes

**The Sorcerer’s Apprentice** _–_ Paul Dukas

_Direction:_ James Algar

_Story Development:_ Perce Pearce, Carl Fallberg
_Art Direction:_ Tom Codrick, Charles Philippi, Zack Schwartz  
_Background Paintings:_ Claude Coats, Stan Spohn, Albert Dempster, Eric Hansen  
_Animation Supervision:_ Fred Moore, Vladimir Tytla  
_Animation:_ Les Clark, Riley Thompson, Marvin Woodward, Preston Blair, Edward Love, Ugo D’Orsi, George Rowley, Cornett Wood  

**Rite of Spring** _–_ Igor Stravinsky  
_Direction:_ Bill Roberts, Paul Satterfield  
_Story Development and Research:_ William Martin, Leo Thiele, Robert Sterner, John Fraser McLeish  
_Art Direction:_ McLaren Stewart, Dick Kelsey, John Hubley  
_Background Paintings:_ Ed Starr, Brice Mack, Edward Levitt  
_Animation Supervision:_ Wolfgang Reitherman, Joshua Meador  
_Animation:_ Philip Duncan, John McManus, Paul Busch, Art Palmer, Don Tobin, Edwin Aardal, Paul B. Kossoff  
_Special Camera Effects:_ Gail Papineau, Leonard Pickley  

**The Pastoral Symphony** _–_ Ludwig van Beethoven  
_Direction:_ Hamilton Luske, Jim Handley, Ford Beebe  
_Story Development:_ Otto Englander, Webb Smith, Erdman Penner, Joseph Sabo, Bill Peet, George Stallings  
_Character Designs:_ James Bodrero, John P. Miller, Lorna S. Soderstrom  
_Art Direction:_ Hugh Hennesy, Kenneth Anderson, J. Gordon Legg, Herbert Ryman, Yale Gracey, Lance Nolley  
_Background Paintings:_ Claude Coats, Ray Huffine, W. Richard Anthony, Arthur Riley, Gerald Nevius, Roy Forkum  
_Animation Supervision:_ Fred Moore, Ward Kimball, Ward Kimball, Eric Larson, Art Babbitt,
Oliver M. Johnston Jr, Don Towsley  
_Animation:_ Berny Wolf, Jack Campbell, Jack Bradbury, James Moore, Milt Neil, Bill Justice, John Elliotte, Walt Kelly, Don Lusk, Lynn Karp, Murray McClellan, Robert W. Youngquist,
Harry Hamsel  

**Dance of the Hours** _–_ Amilcare Ponchielli  
_Direction:_ T. Hee, Norman Ferguson  
_Character Designs:_ Martin Provensen, James Bodrero, Duke Russell, Earl Hurd  
_Art Direction:_ Kendall O’Connor, Harold Doughty, Ernest Nordli  
_Background Paintings:_ Albert Dempster, Charles Conner  
_Animation Supervisor:_ Norman Ferguson  
_Animation:_ John Lounsbery, Howard Swift, Preston Blair, Hugh Fraser, Harvey Toombs, Norman Tate, Hicks Lokey, Art Elliott, Grant Simmons, Ray Patterson, Franklin Grundeen  

**Night on Bald Mountain** _–_ Modest Moussorgsky  
_Ave Maria –_ Franz Schubert  
_Direction:_ Wilfred Jackson  
_Story Development:_ Campbell Grant, Arthur Heinemann, Phil Dike  
_Art Direction:_ Kay Nielsen, Terrell Stapp, Charles Payzant, Thor Putnam  
_Background Paintings:_ Merle Cox, Ray Lockrem, Robert Storms, W. Richard Anthony  
_Animation Supervision:_ Vladimir Tytla  
_Animation:_ John McManus, William N. Shull, Robert W. Carlson Jr, Lester Novros, Don Patterson  
_Special Animation Effects:_ Joshua Meador, Miles E. Pike, John F. Reed, Daniel MacManus  
_Special Camera Effects:_ Gail Papineau, Leonard Pickley  
_Special Lyrics for ‘Ave Maria’:_ Rachel Field  
_Choral Director:_ Charles Henderson  
_Soloist:_ Julietta Novis  

USA 1940©  
124 mins  

\* Uncredited  

With thanks to The Walt Disney Company  
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTU3MDczODEyOF19
-->