


<![endif]-->

A widow makes sacrifices to ensure her son gets an education. Years later, when she visits him, she is surprised by how his life has turned out and how little he has told her of it. The son in turn comes to appreciate the cost of his mother’s sacrifice. Ozu underpins this moving portrait of a mother-son relationship with questions regarding the true value of material wealth and the qualities that are cherished and rewarded in contemporary society.

bfi.org.uk

_The Only Son_, a film about the failure of _risshin shusse_, ‘getting on’, is sweeping in its referential scope. Its 13-year time span includes a portrait of rural life more detailed than that in _Story of Floating Weeds_, a rare depiction of the silk-spinning industry, and a vision of Tokyo quite different from the nostalgic _shitamachi_ or the jazzy metropolis seen in the earlier films. This is a new, raw Tokyo. We are no longer in the coffeeshops of the college comedies, or the trim streets of _Walk Cheerfully_ and _Dragnet Girl_, nor even in the downtown of _Passing Fancy_. The city of _The Only Son_ is a cluster of ramshackle tenements pasted against a wasteland of factories and weedy plains straight out of _An Inn in Tokyo_. The early silent films had revelled in an urban landscape that is kept insistently offscreen here. No outside views show the streets around Ryosuke’s school or the hospital where Tomibo is taken. Okubo’s pork-chop café sits in a dusty stretch of laundry lines, power poles, and vacant lots. Ryosuke and Otsune go sightseeing to Asakusa, Ueno Park, and the Kudan hill, which offers a fine view of the city; but we merely hear reports of this tour. The expedition that we actually see consists of mother and son squatting before the city garbage-treatment plant. _The Only Son_ originated as a silent film to be called _Tokyo Is a Nice Place_.

Ozu’s remarks about persisting in a silent style should not distract us from his accomplishments in the domain of sound. _The Only Son_ introduces several of his characteristic sound techniques. The lyrical music, with one theme based on ‘Old Black Joe’, is not yet used to signal and smooth over transitions, but it runs throughout two scenes. With respect to dialogue, Ozu is already practicing the restraint he would maintain for the next 25 years; he will not cut so as to break a character’s line, not even by a syllable.  
**David Bordwell, _Ozu and the Poetics of Cinema_ (BFI/Princeton, 1988) Reproduced by kind permission of Bloomsbury Publishing © David Bordwell**  
<br>
<![endif]-->

**THE ONLY SON (HITORI MUSUKO)**

_Director:_ Yasujiro Ozu

_Production Company:_ Shochiku Co. Ltd.

_Assistant Directors:_ Kenkichi Hara,

Hamao Negishi, Nobuo Nishikawa

_Screenplay:_ Tadao Ikeda, Masao Arata

_Based on an idea by:_ James Maki

_Director of Photography:_ Shojiro Sugimoto

_Lighting:_ Toshimitsu Nakajima

_Camera Assistants:_ Yuharu Atsuta, Kiyohisa Sakurai, Hitoshi Unozawa  
_Editors:_ Hideo Mohara, Eiichi Hesegawa  
_Art Director:_ Tatsuo Hamada  
_Music:_ Senji Ito  
_Sound Recording:_ Hideo Mohara, Eiichi Hesegawa  
_Sound System:_ SMS  
_Studio:_ Shochiku Kamata  

**Cast**  
Chôko Iida _(Otsune Nonomiya)_  
Shinichi Himori _(Ryosuke, Otsune’s son)_  
Masao Hayama _(Ryosuke as a child)_  
Yoshiko Tsubouchi _(Sugiko, Ryosuke’s wife)_  
Mitsuko Yoshikawa _(Otaka)_  
Tokkan Kozo _(Tomibo, Otaka’s son)_  
Chishu Ryu _(Okubo, Ryosuke’s teacher)_  
Tomoko Naniwa _(Okubo’s wife)_  
Bakudan Kozo _(Okubo’s son)_  
Eiko Takamatsu  
Seiichi Kato  
Kazuko Ojima  
Kiyoshi Aono  

Japan 1936  
83 mins  
Digital  

The screening on Saturday 16 September will be introduced by season curator Ian Haydn Smith.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE1NjAxNjE2NTZdfQ==
-->