



Legendary singer Farid El-Atrash stars alongside screen icon Shadia in this visual feast, which finds the pair playing characters forced into a marriage neither of them wants, solely to attain an inheritance. Combining comedy with sumptuous musical numbers and subtle class commentary, Chahine ponders how marriage can be as illusory as a theatre show, but love always finds a way to win out.  
**bfi.org.uk**

It is instructive to situate Chahine’s bio-filmography within the context of Egyptian cinema and the overall political and cultural scene, for the seeds of many of his films were sown in historical events which he witnessed. It is significant, for example, that the year he made his debut as a film director (1950) happened to fall in between two major historical turning points. In 1948, the Arabs lost Palestine and Israel was born; in 1952, Colonel Gamal Abdel Nasser led the bloodless Revolution which ended a corrupt monarchy. The significance of these two watershed events, artistically speaking, is that they shaped the society which Chahine chose to portray on the screen for the next 50 years.

In his early period (1952-70), Chahine was preoccupied with the large issues of his time the liberation movements that were sweeping the Arab world, be it colonialism or monarchy; the Egyptian _fellah_, whose welfare was central to the Revolution; the rise of a new kind of leadership, as exemplified by the charismatic Nasser; and by Arab socialism and the betrayal of it by those who put self-interest above national interest. The seismic Revolution of 1952 which ended the 141-year-old dynasty that Muhammad Ali had started in 1811, made the Free Officers who engineered it instant heroes, and inaugurated the new era of pan-Arab Nationalism. Serious Egyptian filmmakers were also encouraged by what they were hearing in regard to their own medium. The first president of the new Republic, General Muhammad Naguib, delivered a major speech which resonated throughout the Egyptian film industry. After criticising the ‘effeminacy and moral depravity’ that had reflected the old regime, he added, ‘Today we cannot accept from Art or from those in charge of it anything like what used to happen in the past.’ The industry was now in concert with the policies advocated by the new regime. While some directors were in favour of the government becoming involved in the film industry, Youssef Chahine was satisfied to listen and not comment.’

Two years before the Free Officers’ Revolution, Chahine had his own ideas on filmmaking. With his first film, _Baba Amin_ (_Daddy Amin_), which he made at the age of 24, he conceived an agenda for himself while accommodating genuine requirements of local tradition, he would deal with more urgent themes. This introduced a new departure from contemporary Egyptian cinema in seriousness and originality. From the very beginning Chahine began to lay bare parts of his autobiography.

The day after his wedding in 1951, Chahine started his second film, _Nile Boy_, which was ‘an adaptation of the stage play _Nature Boy_ by the American Grant Marshall.’ The film is important for two reasons. One, it deals with the Egyptian _fellah_, a subject to which Chahine would return several times. Two, the film marks Chahine’s entrée into international film festivals. The way he went about it is also illustrative of his resolve to broaden his horizon and to bring attention to Egyptian cinema in general. Still in his twenties and unaware of procedures, Chahine carried his film cans under his arm and headed for Venice, only to be told that his film could not be scheduled. Because he had neither submitted an application nor been invited to enter his film, it would not be shown. But Chahine stood his ground. He argued and sought assistance from another Egyptian director, Niazi Mustapha, who happened to be there, until _Nile Boy_ was given a slot out of competition at ten o’clock in the morning.

In one of his early films, _The Blazing Sun_ (1954), Chahine introduced Omar Sharif to the screen. Omar Sharif was at that time still known by his real name, Michel Shalhoub. He was a fellow Alexanderine and a graduate of Victoria College, which Chahine had attended six years earlier. Visually, _Blazing_ represented something new in Egyptian cinema. The chase and the extremely long shots and high angles in the exotic setting of the monumental columns at Luxor reminded viewers of the director’s affinity with Hollywood.

This last characteristic became particularly apparent in some of the musicals he directed at this time, such as _My One and Only Love_ (1957), which contains one of the loveliest and most inventive duets in the history of Egyptian cinema. Here we find two singers enacting the love/hate relationship of young lovers, with charm and liveliness that was often missing in Egyptian musicals.

During his first seven years, however, Chahine also became known as the ‘wrecker of producers.’ He earned the epithet after _Devil in the Desert_ (1954), also starring Omar Sharif. While the film was Chahine’s first major box-office failure, the label itself was really placed on its young director too early in his career.

A series of political upheavals intervened before the next phase of Chahine’s career. Their relevance to Chahine was more indirect than direct, but nevertheless they help reveal his political growth and the psychological condition of his potential audiences. On the positive side, Nasser was able to negotiate a peaceful evacuation of the British troops from Egypt, but after the United States reneged on its promise to finance the Aswan Dam, Nasser retaliated by nationalising the Suez Canal. The crisis escalated into the British-French-Israeli invasion of the Suez Canal zone in 1956. After the shooting had stopped, the Canal remained in Egyptian hands and Nasser was hailed as a hero in much of the Arab world. Syria invited Egypt to form a union with her. Though reluctant, Nasser agreed to form a republic with him as its president, and many thought of the newly formed United Arab Republic as a harbinger to the Arab unity they desired.  
**Ibrahim Fawal, _BFI World Directors: Youssef Chahine_ (BFI Publishing, 2002)**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTkwODQ0MzY3M119
-->