<![endif]-->

Reminiscent of Godard’s early genre movies, Leos Carax’s second feature combines a semi-parodic crime fable about rivals seeking to steal a vaccine for a new virus, a faltering romance between innocents trapped in an adult world, and the director’s evident delight in conspicuous cinematic artifice and whimsy. Piccoli invests Max, a reluctant gangster with a young lover (Binoche, in an often thankless role), with unexpected pathos.

**A contemporary review**

The _bande à trois_ consisting of Besson, Beineix and now Carax, currently acclaimed as the ‘newest wave’ in French cinema, illustrates how strong the example of the old New Wave remains. This is a cinema about cinema about cinema, highly derivative and deliberately so, which most resembles both the cinema of two decades ago and the American cinema it refers to in its urbanity. It is metropolitan through and through – a _mise en scène_ of what in _Alphaville_ seemed merely fantastic but is now often a gruesome reality.

Both Carax’s features, _Boy Meets Girl_ and _Mauvais sang_, reinvent the city, transforming it into a Utopia for the year 2000. Carax assumes the surrealist heritage but has exchanged serendipity for the menace appropriate to the  
new millennium.

Few moviegoers would attend to Carax’s films for their plot, towards which the director’s attitude is at best casual: if you must have it, let it be slender and preferably unoriginal. _Boy Meets Girl_ is eponymously the tale of young love. _Mauvais sang_, on the other hand, is a sort of thriller (a nuance captured in the otherwise inexplicable English translation of the title _The Night Is Young_) which is peopled by sort of underworld characters, with a vague gangster (Michel Piccoli splendid in the Eddie Constantine role), a would-be moll (Juliette Binoche got up to look like Louise Brooks but called Anna), a deceased gangster’s cardsharp son, Alex, plus an accomplice, Hans, who is the only one of them who looks remotely heavy enough for the part. This crew of slightly flaccid criminals is attempting in desultory fashion to steal the only known cure for STBO, a new and fatal virus which attacks all those who make love  
without love.

Needless to say there is a rival gang, in the pay of a different laboratory, which is led by a demonic American woman who looks like the ageing Gloria Swanson, and they attempt to get Alex to double-cross his pals. A chase ensues followed by a shoot-out. You’ve seen it all before, usually starring Anna Karina and Jean-Paul Belmondo. These themes are commonplace and the use of the genre is so familiar in French cinema that we would almost have been surprised if they had not been used to structure the film. Nevertheless, Carax’s skill should not be underestimated, and the insistently heavy-handed self-referentiality of comparable films – Iosseliani’s _Les Favoris de la Lune_ or Deville’s _Le Paltoquet_ – shows that the thriller cannot necessarily be recycled with impunity, even if it is ultimately no more than a convenient narrative peg.  
In _Mauvais sang_, unless one were to choose a paranoid interpretation of the film, the plot remains resolutely insignificant.

In fact Carax most resembles his predecessors, both the pre-1968 Godard and the early Truffaut, in the area in which he is most unexpectedly original, namely the emotional intensity and anxiety that so evidently run through his films. Despite what some viewers have said about youth culture, _Boy Meets Girl_ is less about how to be streetwise in the 1980s than about love – love writ large and without any of the irony the title implies. In the same way, much of _Mauvais sang_ is devoted to Alex’s attempts to seduce Anna, and the fact that in Piccoli she already has a lover twice her age and that she might be struck by STBO were she to succumb without loving Alex only makes the attempt more poignant. It is extremely disconcerting, because so unexpected, to encounter such emotions presented without cynicism or patronage, and is perhaps something only the French cinema now does, but the reason Carax’s films are compelling is that they combine visual pleasure with sentiment. Thus Alex’s courtship of Anna is played out as a series of gags from the silent cinema but almost completely without words.

Here Carax is brilliantly served by Denis Lavant who plays the leading role ‘Alex’ in both films – such reiteration leading one to believe that the actor serves, a la Jean-Pierre Léaud, as a kind of alter ego. It comes as no surprise to learn that Lavant has a background in mime. His face, which is gaunt, pockmarked with acne and with narrow, deep-set eyes, is the most compellingly melancholy since Jean-Louis Barrault, whom he resembles not as the youthful Baptiste but as an old man. It is an old young face, constantly wearing grease-paint, the sad clown of legend destined never to be successful in love. Through the expressiveness of face and body, of a language beyond or anterior to words, particularly with Lavant and Juliette Binoche but to a greater or lesser degree with all his actors, Carax goes back to the origins of the cinema as well as to a state of emotional innocence temporarily recaptured in a look or a gesture – the woman tap-dancing in _Boy Meets Girl_, the juggling sequence in _Mauvais sang_. This is why Carax’s films make Besson’s look merely slick, all gloss and no substance however accurately they capture a mood, since unlike his contemporaries Carax appears able to portray a corrupt world with an innocent eye – indeed, the innocent eye of the early days of the film industry.

Jill Forbes, _Sight and Sound_, Autumn 1987


<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTUwNjczMTA0NV19
-->