---
layout: post
title: Opera
published: true
date: 2023-05-08
readtime: true
categories: ['DARIO ARGENTO<br>DOORS INTO DARKNESS']
tags: [Thriller, Horror]
metadata: 'Italy 1987, 107 mins<br> Director: Dario Argento'
pdf: '2023-05-08-opera.pdf'
---

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

_+ intro by Michael Blyth, season curator (Monday 8 May only)_

_Opera_ is, arguably, Dario Argento’s last truly great film – it all gets a bit patchy after this and although there were some memorable moments still to come, no other film would be as wholly satisfying as _Opera_. It marks the end of a remarkable run of films that began in 1970 with _The Bird With the Crystal Plummage_ (1970), a culmination in many ways of the themes and obsessions that had informed Argento’s career from the off.

Opera understudy Betty (Cristina Marsillach) gets her big break when the arrogant star Mara Cecova (not seen on screen, but Argento had wanted Vanessa Redgrave to play the part) is injured in a car accident. So Betty is thrust in the spotlight, taking over the role of Lady Macbeth in a revisionist adaptation of Verdi’s opera at the Parma opera House by British director Marco (Ian Charleson, in his last film role before his untimely death from complications caused by AIDS in 1990). But Betty has attracted the attention of sadistic killer who ties her up, attaching needles to her face to prevent her from closing her eyes while he first kills her boyfriend Stefano (William McNamara) and later her dresser Giulia (Coralina Cataldi-Tassoni). The killer, who she barely sees, triggers memories of the murder of her mother when she was a child. Inspector Alan Santini (Urbano Barberini) is on the case but is unable to prevent the murder of Betty’s agent Mira (Daria Nicolodi) and Marco becomes convinced that the ravens being used in the production may have witnessed Giulia’s death and the killing of several of their number. Argento had form in using wildlife as witnesses to murder (see the insects in _Phenomena_ (1985)) and in one of those delirious turns that we’ve come to expect and love, on opening night, he has Marco unleash the surviving ravens on the audience who descend on the killer…

As ever the plot really isn’t up to much – it’s the usual standard issue _giallo_ psycho-thriller with all the head-scratching eccentricity Argento is famed for – but the set pieces are magnificent and for once, it’s an Argento film that’s actually about something – about several things in fact. It’s a film about watching, seeing and voyeurism, about the relationship between art and violence and particularly about the relationship between cinemas and more ‘reputable’ forms or art. It’s arguably Argento’s most self-reflexive film, as much about him, his career and the standing of his films in the eyes of the critical establishment as it is about a mad serial killer. The film’s most iconic image, of a terrified Betty being forced to watch the horrors inflicted on her friends by a row of pins on her cheek, preventing her from closing them came, Argento claimed, from a jokey reference he would make to being annoyed that audiences kept looking away from his horror highlights. Argento also based the story on his own experiences trying to stage a production of Giuseppe Verdi’s _Macbeth_, Ian Charleson being the most obvious stand-in for the director in any of his films.

As you’d expect, _Opera_ is full of the bravura camera balletics that we’ve come to expect from Argento, his cameras obsessively picking out tiny details here and there, his restless Steadicam barely standing still for a second. The set pieces are as breath-taking as you’d expect. Daria Nicolodi’s relationship with Argento had just come to an end and she was reluctant to accept her role in the film until she read the extraordinary way that she would meet her demise. Elsewhere the not-terribly-convincing fake ravens make a spectacular circuit around the opera house, finally revealing the identity of the killer and there’s a memorably grim moment when the killer tries to retrieve an incriminating bracelet that a victim has just swallowed (you have to be there really…)

Inevitably, Argento references Gaston Leroux’s _The Phantom of the Opera_ (a book he himself would adapt as _Il fantasma dell’opera/The Phantom of the Opera_ (1998)), with its falling stage light replacing the famous chandelier and the killer’s obsession with a singer. It’s a more effective take on a story that Argento first encountered as a child via the 1943 film version directed by Arthur Lubin (‘I was very young, and I was on vacation with my family, and there was a retrospective of old films, and one of them was _The Phantom of the Opera_ with Claude Rains that was in colour. It was something very important for my career because I began to follow these stories that were morbid’) than his underwhelming revisionist take on the tale.

Argento tries to shoehorn in some insight into the killer’s inner workings via a poorly made throbbing brain – which is a bit unnecessary and frankly not a great effect – and the film really doesn’t need such niceties. It’s a film that playfully dances backwards and forwards between the rarefied world of ‘high art’ and the scurrilous world of the horror film. The bursts of heavy metal music – an annoying tic that Argento had picked up making his previous film, _Phenomena_ – might at first seem as at odds with the lavishly opera as the cruel violence is with the sumptuous settings – but the version of _Macbeth_ that Marco is trying to stage looks like a heavy metal, _Mad Max_ (1979) version, set in some post-apocalyptic setting with set design that wouldn’t have been out of place in the most outrageous of 80s metal promo videos.

Curiously, Argento seems to borrow his ending from Thomas Harris’ novel _Red Dragon_ (filmed in 1986 by Michael Man as _Manhunter_ and again by Brett Ratner as _Red Dragon_ in 2002). In Harris’ book, the killer, Francis Dollarhyde, is thought to have perished in a fire only to unexpectedly pop up again some time later to attack the FBI agent pursuing him. Virtually the same thing happens here, agent Will Graham replaced by Betty, but otherwise it plays out pretty much the same. What Harris doesn’t have is the peculiar coda – cut from early English language versions retitled _Terror at the Opera_ by distributors who probably couldn’t believe what they were seeing – in which a traumatised Betty wanders through the grass, finds a lizard and waxes lyrical about the power of nature.

Beautifully photographed by British cinematographer Ronnie Taylor and directed with Argento’s trademark precision and eye for gorgeous detail, _Opera_ hasn’t always had the love it deserves, coming after the oddball but enjoyable _Phenomena_ and at standing the peak of the director’s filmography, just before his long and dispiriting decline. It’s certainly far better than anything that would follow, a last hurrah before something started to go horribly wrong and he would struggle to find anything like his old form. _Opera_ may not stand alongside the real gems like _Deep Red_ (1975), _Suspiria_ (1977), _Inferno_ (1980) or _Tenebre_ (1982) but it’s still a minor masterpiece in its own right.  
**Kevin Lyons, eofftvreview.wordpress.com, 27 November 2020**  
<br>
<![endif]-->

**Opera**

_Director_: Dario Argento  
_Production Companies_: Associazione Direttori Cineproduzioni, Cecchi Gori Group Tiger Cinematografica  
_Production Company_: Dacfilm *  
_Produced in collaboration with_: RAI  
_Executive Producers_: Ferdinando Caputo  
_Producer_: Dario Argento  
_Unit Managers_: Olivier Gérard, Fabrizio Diaz  
_Production Supervisors_: Alessandro Calosci, Verena Baldeo  
_Screenplay_: Dario Argento, Franco Ferrini  
_Based on an original idea by_: Dario Argento  
_Director of Photography_: Ronnie Taylor  
_Camera Operator_: Antonio Scaramuzza  
_Special Effects_: Renato Agostini  
_Animatronics_: Sergio Stivaletti  
_Editor_: Franco Fraticelli  
_Production Designer_: Davide Bassan  
_Art Director (Regio Theatre, Parma)_:

Gian Maurizio Fercioni  
_Set Dresser_: Valeria Paoloni  
_Costume Designer_: Francesca Lia Morandini  
_Chief Make-up Artist_: Rosario Prestopino  
_Make-up Artist_: Franco Casagni  
_Hairdresser_: Ferdinando Merolla  
_Music_: Brian Eno, Roger Eno, Claudio Simonetti, Bill Wyman, Terry Taylor, Giuseppe Verdi,

Giacomo Puccini  
_Sound Effects_: Luciano Anzellotti  
_ADR Director_: Robert Rietti  
_Recorded by_:

International Recording Studios (Rome)  
_Recorded by [English Language Version]_:

Gambit International  
_Dubbing Mixer_: Romano Pampaloni

_Cast__:_  
Cristina  Marsillach _(Betty)_

Ian  Charleson _(Marco/Mark)_

Urbano  Barberini _(Inspector Alan Santini)_

Antonella  Vitale _(Marion)_

Daria  Nicolodi _(Myra)_

William  McNamara _(Stefan Obrini)_

Coralina  Cataldi _Tassoni (Giulia/Julia)_

Barbara  Cupisti _(Signora Albertini)_

Antonio  Juorio _(Baddini)_

Carola  Stagnaro _(Alma's mother)_

Francesca  Cassola _(Alma)_

Maurizio  Garrone _(Maurizio)_

Cristina  Giachino _(Maria)_

Gyorivanyi  Gyorgy _(Miro)_

Bjorn  Hammer _(1st cop)_

Peter  Pitsch _(Diva's assistant)_

Sebastiano  Somma _(2nd cop)_

Michele Soavi _(Inspector Daniele Soavi)_ *

Italy 1987  
107 mins  

* Uncredited
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEyMTY5OTE2NTNdfQ==
-->