
<![endif]-->

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

A youth tosses a wrapper into the lap of a Romanian woman begging in Paris… Haneke’s exploration of the various consequences of this thoughtless act leads into the lives of a range of characters, mostly unconnected save that their different experiences touch on the lies, inequalities, injustices and contradictions of contemporary Western Europe. Fragmented, philosophically rigorous, it is nevertheless lucid, dramatically compelling and deeply affecting.  
**bfi.org.uk**

‘Morality,’ _Cahiers du cinéma_ critic Luc Moullet famously said in 1959, ‘is a question of tracking shots.’ Michael Haneke’s first – predominantly – French-language film begins with an exquisitely realised nine-minute tracking shot initially following Juliette Binoche’s Anne as she walks along the street. Were this not a Haneke film, it would be tempting to view these opening moments as a homage to the _nouvelle vague_ filmmakers’ fondness for long-take sequences that juxtapose a beautiful actress with a Parisian boulevard caught in real time. But as in Haneke’s earlier _71 Fragments of a Chronology of Chance_ and_  
The Seventh Continent_, both of which introduce the fragmented, episodic narrative structure employed in _Code Unknown_, Haneke is concerned here with philosophical first principles rather than referentiality.

As this sequence-shot bears witness to the sudden street incident that links the disparate experiences of Maria (a Romanian immigrant), Amadou (the son of West African refugees), Anne, and Jean (the brother of Anne’s boyfriend Georges), the film offers the first of a number of scenes which use the multicultural public spaces of Paris, not for their fashionability (Haneke points out he could as easily have filmed his script in London) but as a laboratory for testing the relationship between representation and reality. The results confirm Haneke’s reputation as one of cinema’s most accomplished moralists.

Both _Benny’s Video_ and _Funny Games_ tended to didacticism and indulged Haneke’s perverse modernist desire to punish us for our collusion with the commodified – and thus, for Haneke at least, mendacious – narrative certainties of dominant cinema. _Code Unknown_, on the other hand, furthers Haneke’s project of countering what he sees as the degradation of our sense of the real by modulating with true virtuosity between various realisms. The opening sequence is by turns manipulative – stoking our indignation at the policemen’s casually insensitive and implicitly racist handling of the confrontation between Jean and Amadou – and naturalistic, artfully thwarting our desire to reach easy judgement. In a later sequence in the Métro, a static camera observes in neutral long shot – again with an unbroken take – as Anne is tormented by an aggressive Arab youth who, incensed by her lack of reaction to his unprovoked taunts, spits in her face. In between the film presents us with fragments – interspersed with Brechtian fades and sudden Godardian sound edits – which turn on the difficulty of relating in a moral fashion to others in a world in which any communication seems fraught with the dangers of victimisation. Anne, while ironing, turns down the television when she hears screams coming from another apartment and this too is left unexplained and unresolved.

Alongside this quotidian malaise are the characters’ attempts to achieve contact through dissimulation, such as when Anne challenges her elderly neighbour, who may or may not have written a letter purporting to be from an abused child in the adjoining apartment, or when Anne, during an argument with Georges, claims – we don’t know whether it’s true or not – to have aborted his child when he was in Kosovo. Georges’ own subterfuge, his surreptitious photographing of people on the Métro – a form of surveillance that leads to a marvellous montage of portraits (the work of war photographer Luc Delahaye) – further complicates the film’s insistent thematic build up around responsibility to others and the unbridgeable glacial distance between people.

As Haneke has suggested in interviews, all of this would merely be a reiteration of various modernist clichés about the impossibility of communication were the film not to comprise one superb sequence after another. Rather than dryly demonstrating a thesis, each scene conveys a deeply affecting sense of authenticity and immediacy. The performance of the deglamorised – but still luminescent – Juliette Binoche, whose approach to Haneke initiated the film, contributes immeasurably to the success of _Code Unknown_. A sequence from the film she is shooting (she plays an actress), in which she is interrogated – one of two startling scenes that reveal Haneke’s grasp of the strength of our desire to be manipulated (the other – at first deliberately confusing levels of reality – involves a toddler crawling on the edge of a tall building) – is a masterclass in close-up acting.

That amid all these heavy-duty moral/aesthetic preoccupations Haneke manages to offer powerfully understated images of the lot of economic migrants – Maria’s silent deportation and return to Paris – adds to the sense of _Code Unknown_ as a major achievement. Orchestrating his long takes, his superb use of off-screen space and chilly long shots, Haneke sets about if not reinventing, then reinvigorating a non-naive realism for the 21st century. In the process, he gives us the most intellectually stimulating and emotionally provocative piece of European cinema of recent times.  
**Richard Falcon, _Sight and Sound_, May 2001**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNjk5MDk5MTMxXX0=
-->