<![endif]-->

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

Philip K. Dick died three months before the US release of _Blade Runner_, the film based on his 1968 science-fiction novel _Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?_ But what he had seen impressed him. He described the footage he was shown by director Ridley Scott as ‘The greatest 20 minutes I ever experienced… a tremendously information-rich experience… like being transported to the ultimate city of the future.’

Fans of _Blade Runner_ love the film for any number of reasons, from Vangelis’ gleaming score, to the visual mishmash of neo-_noir_, Asian-American and future-past, to the joyous lunacy of Rutger Hauer as replicant leader Batty, the film’s true hero, lost in rain. For those who have forgotten the story, the replicants are short-lived synthetic people, exploited and feared by the ‘real’ things; as with HAL in _2001: A Space Odyssey_ (1968), they’re far more human than the humans. But the reasons Dick gave – the sense of being swallowed up in a megacity conceived as a hybrid of New York and Hong Kong, where geishas loom from huge signboards and the _mise en scène_ of chokingly congested street crowds can suddenly give way to empty interiors of rippling light – help explain the release of the new version.

This apparently ‘final cut’ of _Blade Runner_ seems to be about maintaining its world’s wraparound seductiveness, honouring the filmmakers’ extraordinary efforts to render tiny details exotically alien, even while using the broad brushstrokes of _film noir_. From the opening shot of the fire-belching ‘Hades’ landscape, this is a reality one doesn’t want punctured – which it tends to be when the replicants die. There’s an incongruous blue sky when Batty’s dove flies up to heaven during the film’s climax, and an obvious stunt double when the replicant snake dancer Zhora perishes, swathed in neon-drenched plastic and shattered glass. Both shots are revised for this final cut, keeping the illusion’s integrity better intact for old and new generations.

The idea of a ‘final’ cut was instigated when Warner Home Video suggested in 2000 that Scott supervise a ‘definitive’ version. The subsequent delay was apparently due to negotiations with the film’s owners, Bud Yorkin and Jerry Perenchio, but in the event it meant the revision benefited from advancing techniques. One can only wonder what Dick would have thought had he been in the screening room with actress Joanna Cassidy, watching her character Zhora being digitally decapitated and her ‘real’ head attached for a stunt she never performed. Still stranger is the revision of an out-of-synch scene in which Harrison Ford’s ‘blade runner’ Deckard (a replicant-hunting gumshoe) menaces an Egyptian artificial snake dealer. After failing to find a suitable ADR track, the restoration team employed the services of Ford’s son Benjamin, who provided not just lipsynch but his actual lips, transposed over his father’s face.

Andrew Osmond, _Sight & Sound_, January 2008

In purely aesthetic terms, _Blade Runner_ remains one of the influential pop-culture creations of the modern age. It is certainly one of the most achingly beautiful, sumptuously art-directed films ever. The story takes place in a dystopian Los Angeles in 2019, a grungy industrial metropolis of deep shadows, low lights, constant rain and endless night. In the script, the location of the opening aerial panorama is listed as ‘Hades’, hinting that the lost souls in this story may already be dead and stranded in purgatory.

Ridley Scott sketched many of the film’s design concepts himself with help from ‘visual futurist’ Syd Mead, production designer Lawrence G. Paull, art director David L. Snyder and special effects wizards Douglas Trumbull and Richard Yuricich. Working with old-school, pre-digital methods like miniature tabletop models and matte backdrop paintings, the _Blade Runner_ team concocted a Betamax retro-futurism that is as much steampunk as cyberpunk.

Vintage Hollywood _film noir_ is a heavy presence in _Blade Runner_, as much for its paranoid fatalism as its striking high-contrast style. Deckard’s trench-coated, gruff, laconic detective is a clear modern-day twist on Humphrey Bogart or Robert Mitchum in their hard-bitten gumshoe prime. Indeed, actor-turned-screenwriter Hampton Fancher wrote the script with Mitchum in mind. Of course, the role eventually went to Harrison Ford, but his world-weary performance still owes more to _The Maltese Falcon_ than the Millennium Falcon.

Reaching back four decades into the past to help imagine a future four decades hence, the film’s visual reference points include Edward Hopper’s iconic 1942 painting _Nighthawks_, Miss Havisham’s clutter-strewn bedroom in David Lean’s classic Dickens adaptation _Great Expectations_, and Joan Crawford’s vampish outfits in _Mildred Pierce_. The film’s rousing score by Vangelis throbs with strident analogue electronica, but also lonely jazz saxophones and bluesy echoes from the past. _Blade Runner_ is saturated in melancholy, overshadowed by death and peopled by ghosts. Visually and sonically, it is awash with hauntological whispers.

As a cultural catalyst, the influence of _Blade Runner_ is hard to overstate.  
In cinema alone, it launched a flood of Philip K. Dick adaptations, from _Total Recall_ to _Minority Report_ to _A Scanner Darkly_. The grungy cyberpunk aesthetic and future-noir cityscapes of _Brazil_, _Strange_ _Days_, _City of Lost Children_, _The_ _Fifth Element_, _Twelve_ _Monkeys_, _The Element of Crime_, _Dark_ _City_, the _Matrix_ trilogy and many more all owe a debt to Scott’s sumptuous sci-fi symphony.

Dark love stories about human males falling for synthetic females have also become commonplace since _Blade Runner_, most recently Spike Jonze’s _Her_ and Alex Garland’s _Ex Machina_. Garland also adapted Kazuo Ishiguro’s novel _Never Let Me Go_ for director Mark Romanek in 2010, a sombre near-future fable about human clones bred as organ donors who vainly fight for a few more years of life. More than any killer-robot blockbuster, these small cerebral films capture the yearning melancholy of _Blade Runner_, explicitly sympathising with their replicant heroes.

A belated sequel, _Blade Runner 2049_, was released in 2017, without Scott but with Ford. Spanish director Ion de Sosa made a minimalist version of Dick’s original novel, titled _Androids Dream_ (_Sueñan los androides_). Set in 2052, and shot among the high-rise apartment blocks of Benidorm, it consists of documentary-style vignettes of harmless replicants being brutally ‘retired’ in shops, restaurants and nightclub toilets by a steely human bounty hunter.

_Blade Runner_’s influence on broader pop culture is also immense. It spawned numerous comic books and computer-game spin-offs, plus three sequel novels by K.W. Jeter, and has long been cited as an influence by cyberpunk author William Gibson. The Vangelis score also has its own separate cult following: Massive Attack have performed it live while Tricky, Dillinja and many others have sampled it. Band names borrowed from the film include The Tyrell Corporation, the Replicants and Basic Pleasure Model.

Stephen Dalton, bfi.org.uk


<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNzM3MDA3OTc3XX0=
-->