
**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

By 1942, Disney was at war. On the day of Pearl Harbor, the studio’s sound stage had been commandeered by the US army for vehicle and anti-aircraft gun maintenance, with three million rounds of ammo stored in the parking lot. Mickey and Donald were starring in public information films about chemical warfare, while propaganda shorts included a resprayed _Three Little Pigs_ (1933) with a Nazi wolf.

Of _Bambi_’s cast, Friend Owl, who swoops through the softly radiant forest at the film’s start, appeared on an army-commissioned insignia... wielding a machine gun. Flower the skunk popped up on another, in a gas mask. At _Bambi_’s world premiere in London in August 1942, the climactic forest fire must have struck a chord with the Blitzed audience. A film with no on-screen humans was now attached to humanity’s greatest conflict, whether Walt and his audience liked it or not.

_Bambi: A Life in the Woods_ was written in 1923 by the Jewish-Austrian novelist and playwright Siegmund Salzmann, writing as Felix Salten. Disney was introduced to the book in 1935 by MGM director-producer Sidney A. Franklin, who’d purchased the rights but was flummoxed by how to turn the deer drama into live-action. Walt announced the project days after _Snow White_’s triumphant premiere, by which time Salzmann’s book had been banned by  the Nazis.

It was the headiest time in Disney’s history, of unbelievable creative ambition and fecundity. Not content with one feature follow-up to _Snow White_, Walt ploughed ahead with three: _Bambi_, _Pinocchio_ and _Fantasia_, while he was also developing _Alice in Wonderland_ and _Peter Pan_. But the golden period ended when war broke out in Europe. The foreign markets vanished and _Pinocchio_ and _Fantasia_, released in 1940, both flopped. In 1941, a bitter strike soured the studio and coloured Walt’s reputation ever after. _Bambi_’s core animators were unaffected, but the strike delayed the later stages of an already sluggish production, even before Pearl Harbor.

_Bambi_ made extensive use of the costly multiplane camera, giving depth to scenes such as the glorious opening forest reverie. Meanwhile, artists struggled to give the cartoon animals realistic anatomies (_Snow White_’s deer were flour sacks in comparison). The deer’s faces, they learned, did not squash and stretch; those principles were better applied to their haunches, ‘shoulders’ and toe-tips to convey a ‘massive swelling and thrusting up in the body,’ as Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston put it in their book, _Disney Animation: The Illusion of Life._

While the picture men studied fawns in a purpose-built studio zoo – and a deer carcass in a noisome art class – costs rose and nerves frayed. Walt made swingeing cuts to the film, reducing the animators to tears, but the last-ditch economies weren’t enough. _Bambi_ was yet another costly flop, and Disney entered its ‘mashed potato and gravy’ years of cheap package films.

To say that _Bambi_ is about frolicking woodland animals is like saying _The Lord of the Rings_ is about little men with hairy feet. Everyone knows the cute scenes: baby Bambi stuck on a fallen tree-trunk (one of the test animations that convinced Walt to make the film) or the rabbit Thumper’s seduction by a girl bunny, his libido displaced to a helplessly peddling paw. The children, led by Thumper, are all stumbles, laughter and chatter. The adults move cautiously and speak sparsely, sometimes with devastating weight: ‘_Man_ … was in the forest’; ‘Your mother can’t be with you any more.’

The focus is squarely on the beautifully drawn animals, their surroundings pushed back into pearly mist and negative space. The backgrounds were inspired by Tyrus Wong, whose sketches encouraged his fellow artists to soften and blur the branches and grasses of Bambi’s world. Impressionism blends with expressionism in bursts of colour. The forest fire is a shivering yellow painting, towering over the trees; the screen brightens to red-orange as the deer herd flees man; Bambi’s fight with a rival stag is all struggling silhouettes, rimmed by livid golds and icy blues.

Scene flows to scene with absolute simplicity; the dance of Fall leaves as seasons pass links the film’s world briefly to _Fantasia._ The terrible human villain is never seen, and the death of Bambi’s mother – one of cinema’s all-time traumas – is restricted to a gunshot, the bleakest of snowscapes and a heartbreaking tear. That Walt cuts from this to the silliest of spring-themed symphonies (with twittering bluebirds modelled on a 1933 short, _Birds in the Spring_) shows his trust and mastery of a medium that turns on a dime in a way unthinkable in live-action. The majestic final hero shot, of a stag standing proud and his father retreating, is Disney masculinity at its most iconic_._

We laugh and we grieve, but mostly we marvel, at a faun’s blinking introduction to a little April shower, to the miracles of snow and ice, to the magnificent herd representing the mystery of adulthood, bounding over Bambi’s head with the clash of cymbals. Disney’s point, admirably unspoken but transparent to a child, is that the fun and fear, the silliness and heartbreak, are all of a piece. This is a _real_ grown-up cartoon.  
**Andrew Osmond, _100 Animated Feature Films_ (BFI/Palgrave Macmillan, 2010)**
<br><br>

**PIPER**<br>

_Director:_ Alan Barillaro<br>

USA 2016<br>

6 mins<br>

**BAMBI**<br>

_Supervising Director:_ David D. Hand<br>

_Story Direction:_ Perce Pearce<br>

©: Walt Disney Productions<br>

_A_ Walt Disney _production_<br>

_Sequence Directors:_ James Algar, Bill Roberts, Norman Wright, Sam Armstrong,

Paul Satterfield, Graham Heid<br>

_Story Adaptation:_ Larry Morey<br>

_From the story by:_ Felix Salten<br>

_Story Development:_ George Stallings, Melvin Shaw, Carl Fallberg, Chuck Couch, Ralph Wright<br>

_Photography:_ Chuck Wheeler *<br>

_Supervising Animators:_ Franklin Thomas,

Milton Kahl, Eric Larson, Oliver M. Johnston Jr<br>

_Animators:_ Fraser Davis, Preston Blair, Bill Justice, John Bradbury, Don Lusk, Bernard Garbutt, Retta Scott, Joshua Meador, Kenneth Hultgren, Phil Duncan, Kenneth O’Brien, George Rowley, Louis Schmitt, Art Palmer, Art Elliott<br>

_Backgrounds:_ Marle T. Cox, Tyrus Wong,

W. Richard Anthony, Art Riley, Stan Spohn,  
Robert McIntosh, Ray Huffine, Travis Johnson,  
Ed Levitt, Joe Stahley<br>

_Art Direction:_ Thomas A. Codrick, Robert C. Cormack, Al Zinnen, McLaren Stewart, Lloyd Harting, David Hilberman, John Hubley, Dick Kelsey<br>

_Colour by:_ Technicolor<br>

_Music by:_ Frank Churchill, Edward Plumb<br>

_Conducted by:_ Alexander Steinert<br>

_Orchestration by:_ Charles Wolcott, Paul J. Smith

_Choral Arrangements by:_ Charles Henderson

_Sound System:_ RCA Sound System

_To_ Sidney A. Franklin _our sincere appreciation_

_Voice Cast:_

Bobby Stewart, Donnie Dunagan_,_

Hardie Albright, John Sutherland _(Bambi)_ *

Peter Behn _(voice of Thumper)_ *

Paula Winslowe _(voice of Bambi’s mother)_ *

USA 1942©

70 mins

* Uncredited
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTAyODg1NzM0XX0=
-->