---
layout: post
title: Mona Lisa
published: true
date: 2023-09-24
readtime: true
categories: ['ACTING HARD<br> WORKING CLASS MASCULINITY IN BRITISH CINEMA']
tags: [Drama, Thriller]
metadata: 'UK/Spain/USA 1986, 104 mins<br> Director: <Neil Jordan'
pdf: '2023-09-24-mona-li.pdf'
---

_Contains strong violence, sexual violence and racist terms._

A bunch of chrysanthemums is hurled at a slammed front door, smartly followed by a dustbin. Enraged by the wife who wants rid of him, George, an amiable small-time Cockney crook, turns on the gathered crowd. Since he’s been in prison, for seven years, on someone else’s behalf, the neighbourhood has been colonised by West Indians. George looks for a face to punch. A slice of old-style working-class drama? Well, yes, in a way, but then – in this opening sequence of _Mona Lisa_ – comes a whiff of new-style British fantasy.

George (Bob Hoskins) is plucked from the affray by his friend Thomas (Robbie Coltrane), a whimsical deadpan Scot, an entrepreneur-mechanic with a taste for whodunits. At the bottom of the street, Thomas has parked George’s lovingly mothballed cream-coloured Jag, all walnut and maroon leather. This is George’s real home: a sentimental symbol for his sentimental values, a proud British car, built before the invention of Maltese pimps or heroin or child sex, when crooks were honest and chipper, when delivery dates meant something and debts were honoured.

The London into which George reimmerses himself is, of course, overflowing with nastiness. Dinny Mortwell (Michael Caine, standing out of the limelight but not missing a moment), the vice baron for whom George took the rap, won’t really see George right, though he does give him a job, of sorts, chauffeuring Simone, a diamond-hard top-bracket prostitute. Waiting dutifully in the foyer of a smart hotel, in the suit in which he emerged from prison, George discovers that service these days is strictly conditional. Cruising in the Jag with Simone, who regularly searches the infernal King’s Cross meat-rack for that something which is the film’s mystery, George observes the human debris, half incredulously: ‘I’ve got a girl that age.’

The first attraction of _Mona_ _Lisa_, directed by Neil Jordan, from a script by him and David Leland, is its immediate confidence and economy. Jordan and his editor Lesley Walker have a sure sense of proportion. To take a small example: the potentially scene-stealing white rabbit which George buys in order to remind Mortwell of his obligation. It is the subject of two comic lines (no more and neither overstated) and then is sent on its way; it is re-introduced at the climax (improbably, but that doesn’t matter) and then allowed a telling final appearance. Exactly right.

Dead time is banished; dialogue counts, all the time; and an occasional hard-bitten line smacks home with transatlantic weight (Simone, in her flat, chilly, Liverpool voice, on the ponce who humiliated her: ‘An animal born in a butcher’s shop’). The locations, from off-season Brighton to Mortwell’s Blackheath mansion with its studiously rambling English garden, have a cinematic freshness which even a comparable up-to-the-minute TV series such as the BBC’s accomplished _Big Deal_ cannot hope to match.

The production design is by Jamie Leonard, the camerawork by Roger Pratt; and it is to the credit of both that the movie’s disparate elements – the fantastical interior of Thomas’ Aladdin’s cave, with its Japanese food sculptures and illuminated madonnas; the sumptuous location sequences in hotel foyers and saloons – seem all of a piece. The film has no false modesty about its size; it’s right, like that of a provincial French mystery by Chabrol.

The Soho clip-joints into which George doggedly ventures looking for Simone’s lost friend Cathy are as one imagines them (sulky hostesses, flat champagne, a cup of tea being brewed behind a bead curtain); and Jordan brings a touch of dry humour (a marching column of second-division Bluebell Girls) to the sequence in the upmarket revue bar in which George finally says his piece to the fork-tongued Mortwell. In the small parts, only perhaps the Arab Raschid, one of Simone’s regular clients, and the elderly gentleman with the surgeon’s gloves who abuses Cathy to a duet from _Madame Butterfly_ hint at caricature; but even they have life-giving lines which make one pleasantly ironical, for a moment, and the other genuinely and displeasingly cruel.

The story – which takes its title from Nat ‘King’ Cole’s silky song (‘Are you warm, are you real, Mona Lisa? Or just a cold and lonely, lovely work of art’) – has seen service. George falls for Simone, his ‘tall, thin, black tart’ (‘Too many t’s,’ Thomas comments, as George tries to fit her into a whodunit of his own devising); but Simone’s heart belongs to the drug-addicted Cathy and she inevitably lets George down.

If this was all, then there would not perhaps be much to go on about. _Mona_ _Lisa_, however, is buoyed by two notably assured and sustained performances. Cathy Tyson plays Simone as a girl purged of self-pity, grown old and watchful and unfeeling long before her time: her angular face, her whole bearing in fact, has a hard edge which she does nothing to soften. Miss Tyson has a slight, boyish build, and her awkward designer clothes – every outfit announcing her profession-accentuate her inescapable bind. Bob Hoskins, for whom Jordan created the part of George, is the perfect sparrow-like foil.

George has an entertainer’s not a point-scorer’s wit. It protects him; without it, he might have been reduced to self-deprecation. Hoskins relishes the role and his relish is infectious. George can head-butt a real villain to the deck of Brighton Pier (though this requires a ludicrous bunny hop to gain the height) and he can gallantly put up an arm to take the razor slash intended for a lady’s face: but he makes little of this, it’s part of what he has picked up along the way.

Once, as Simone is about to keep yet another appointment, George impulsively licks a finger and puts to rights two strands of her hair; he then straightens her clothes, a father sending his daughter on the first date she cares about. George may be something of a self-parodying Cockney sentimentalist, but he has, too, that plain old-fashioned likeability which wins audience hearts and fills cinemas.  
**John Pym, _Sight and Sound_, Autumn 1986**  
<br>

**AN EVERY DAY ACT**  
_Director:_ Gavin Scott Whitfield  
UK 2020  
20 mins  

**MONA LISA**  
_Directed by:_ Neil Jordan  
_©/Presented by:_ HandMade Films  
_Production Company:_ Palace Pictures  
_Executive Producers:_ George Harrison, Denis O’Brien  
_Produced by:_ Patrick Cassavetti, Stephen Woolley  
_Co-producers:_ Nik Powell, Ray Cooper, Chris Brown  
_Production Accountants:_ Bob Blues, Michael Larkins  
_Production Co-ordinator:_ Laura Julian  
_Production Manager:_ Linda Bruce  
_Location Manager:_ Laurie Borg  
_Assistant Location Manager:_ Simon McNair Scott  
_Special Production Consultant:_ Richard Starkey  
_Assistant Director:_ Ray Corbett  
_2nd Assistant Director:_ Chris Brock  
_3rd Assistant Director:_ Tony Aherne  
_Script Supervisor:_ Pat Rambaut  
_Casting Director:_ Susie Figgis  
_Screenplay by:_ Neil Jordan, David Leland  
_Director of Photography:_ Roger Pratt  
_Camera Operator:_ Mike Roberts  
_Follow Focus:_ Bob Stilwell  
_Clapper Loader:_ Bob Brock  
_Camera Grips:_ Porky Rivers, Bill Geddes  
_Chief Electrician:_ Ted Read  
_Still Photographer:_ Clive Coote  
_Special Effects:_ Effects Associates  
_Editor:_ Lesley Walker  
_1st Assistant Editor:_ Jeremy Hume  
_2nd Assistant Editor:_ Kevin Lane  
_Production Designer:_ Jamie Leonard  
_Art Director:_ Gemma Jackson  
_Assistant Art Director:_ Denise Ruben  
_Art Department Assistant:_ Chris Townsend  
_Prop Buyer:_ Kate Kilroy  
_Property Master:_ Les Benson  
_Chargehand Prop:_ Eric Strange  
_Propmen:_ Andy Palmer, Micky Swift, Stan Cook, Alf Smith  
_Construction Manager:_ Andy Evans  
_Costume Designer:_ Louise Frogley  
_Wardrobe Supervisor:_ Brenda Dabbs  
_Make-up Artist:_ Lois Burwell  
_Additional Make-up:_ Nick Dudman  
_Hairdresser:_ Stevie Hall  
_Opticals/Titles:_ Geoff Axtell Associates  
_Music Score by:_ Michael Kamen  
_Soundtrack Music Performed by:_ The National Philharmonic Orchestra  
_[Music] Engineer:_ Dave Hunt  
_[Music] Mixer:_ Andy Jackson  
_Sound Recordist:_ David John  
_Sound Assistant:_ Paul Cridlin  
_Boom Operator:_ Matthew Launay  
_Re-recording Mixers:_ Paul Carr, Brian Paxton  
_Sound Editor:_ Jonathan Bates  
_Footsteps Editor:_ Chris Kelly  
_Additional Post-synch Dialogue:_ Lyps Inc  
_ADR Editor:_ Brian Mann  
_Stunt Arranger:_ Terry Forrestal  

**Cast**  
Bob Hoskins _(George)_  
Cathy Tyson _(Simone)_  
Robbie Coltrane _(Thomas)_  
Michael Caine _(Dinny Mortwell)_  
Clarke Peters _(Anderson)_  
Sammi Davis _(May)_  
Kate Hardie _(Cathy)_  
Zoë Nathenson _(Jeannie)_  
Rod Bedall _(Terry)_  
Joe Brown _(Dudley)_  
Pauline Melville _(George’s wife)_  
Hossein Karimbeik _(Raschid)_  
John Darling _(hotel security)_  
Bryan Coleman _(gentleman in mirror room)_  
Robert Dorning _(hotel bedroom man)_  
Raad Raawi _(Arab servant)_  
David Halliwell _(Tim Devlin)_  
Stephen Persaud _(black youth in street)_  
Maggie O’Neill _(girl in Paradise Club)_  
Gary Cady _(hotel waiter)_  
Donna Cannon _(young prostitute)_  
Perry Fenwick _(pimp)_  
Dawn Archibald _(wig girl in club)_  
Richard Strange _(porn shop man)_  
Alan Talbot _(bath house attendant)_  
Geoffrey Larder _(hotel clerk)_  
Helen Martin _(peep show girl)_  
Kenny Baker, Jack Purvis, Bill Moore _(Brighton buskers)_  
Joanne Sellar _(woman in strip club)_ *  
Alex Hoskins _(sunglasses seller in kiosk)_ *  

UK 1986©  
104 mins  
35mm A BFI National Archive print  
* Uncredited  
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTcxMjUxNTEzNywxMjQzNTk1OTQwXX0=
-->