

<![endif]-->

Disney turned to the Brothers Grimm for its first animated feature. It’s the classic fairy-tale of a Princess who runs away from her vain and wicked stepmother, deep into a forest where she encounters seven eccentric dwarfs. ‘Mirror, mirror, on the wall, who is the fairest one of all?’ A true musical classic, Disney staked everything he owned on the project. Despite industry expectations that it would fail, the film became a global hit and forever changed the medium.  
**bfi.org.uk**

Disney’s _Snow White_ starts with a castle on the hill, foreshadowing _Citizen Kane_’s Xanadu. In the latter film, we pass through a window to find a dying man dropping a snowglobe to smash on the floor. But Walt, too, had to show his fantasy world’s fragility. In _Snow White_’s opening minutes, he presents his sweet princess in a typical cartoon situation, comforting a baby bird. Behind her, a huntsman approaches, face set and eyes fixed. His arm comes up, holding a knife.

And then, of course (of course in hindsight, though it’s far less obvious when you’re watching the film), the huntsman relents, drops his knife, and lets Snow White flee. ‘Everyone in this world was once a child,’ Walt told Cecil B. DeMille in a radio talk. ‘We grow up, our personalities change, but in every one of us something remains of our childhood… where all of us are simple and naïve, without prejudice or bias. In planning a picture, we don’t think of grown-ups and we don’t think of children, but just of that fine, clean, unspoiled spot deep down in every one of us.’ Snow White, or Rosebud.

‘What funny names for children!’ laughs the princess when she enters the dwarfs’ cottage and sees their miniature beds. Then blobby noses pop up one by one over the bedsteads: ‘Why, you’re little men!’ But she could have been right the first time. The bald-pated dwarfs resemble bearded babes (most nakedly the mute clown Dopey) or Peter Pan’s Lost Boys, needing to be told to scrub for dinner or go to bed. Their dialogue is rarely over children’s heads; even when they mine for riches, they ‘don’t know what we dig ’em for.’

Snow White is also infantalised, but Grim Natwick, one of her animators and Betty Boop’s designer, wanted a more womanly character who sometimes breaks through in the drawing. The historian John Canemaker flags a scene where she prepares a gooseberry pie. Significantly, she’s making it for the misogynist Grumpy, with whom she has the most ambiguous relationship: mother, daughter, or…? Unlike rival cartoons, which thrived on transsexuality (Bugs Bunny) or even bestiality (Tex Avery’s anti-Disney _Red Hot Riding Hood_), _Snow White_ sublimates such notions, using Prince Charming for that purpose.

Disney also blurs child-adult distinctions, taking startling swings into horror. Few film moments are more deliciously chilling than the evil Queen, her lovely, haughty face reflected in a bubbling glass, breathing, ‘Now… begin thy magic spell,’ then drinking deep and turning into a monstrous hag. Walt’s four-year-old daughter, Diane, bawled at the scene. Nine years earlier, Walt had been relieved to hear audiences chuckling at _Steamboat Willie_ (1928), his first sound short. Now he’d made a cartoon which – to paraphrase Edward van Sloan in _Frankenstein_ (1931), one of _Snow White_’s likely influences – thrilled people, shocked them, even horrified them.

It also made them sob, during the star-studded Hollywood premiere at the Cathay Circle Theatre. Snow White’s teary elegy, as the dwarfs mourn her in their darkened cottage, was animated by Frank Thomas. Later he would be known as one of Disney’s Nine Old Men; then he was in his twenties. His scene is famously subdued and brief, before the coming of spring and resurrection. But the rest of the film is a grandstanding performance: the posturing Queen, the singing princess, the wildly dancing (and yodelling!) dwarfs. Audience surrogates are constantly on screen, applauding, cowering, sneering (Grumpy grouches ‘Mush!’ during _Snow White_’s love song) or plain enraptured. Even the Queen glowers from a window, and Snow White cringes from bodiless watching eyes in her forest nightmare.

_Snow_ _White_’s legend is festooned by tales of Walt’s performances of the evolving story, acting each role from Dwarf to Prince. He himself described showing the unfinished film to a sceptical banker, filling in the missing drawings with his sweat and oratory. Exaggerated or not, these tales suggest, as Neal Gabler argues, a man straining to embody himself in a film he couldn’t actually draw. After Walt’s death, revisionists argued he was the depthless Prince beside his animators’ toiling Dwarfs. Considering _Snow_ _White_’s torturous production, though, the critic Michael Barrier claimed it was ‘not a story of how (Walt) Disney’s men realised his conception... but of how Disney himself recovered from (his) potentially fatal mistakes and wound up making a much better film.’

For today’s audiences, the great mistake may be the heroine’s relentlessly winsome cuteness in the first twenty minutes, when she and the animals must carry the action before the Dwarfs appear. But for animators and critics, the debate – as heated now as it was in 1937 – swirls round _Snow_ _White’_s pollution of cartoon with live-action. The film is a fairy-tale, but with realistic textures and illusory third dimensions. When characters proved hard to animate, Disney filmed actors as stilted motion references, the live-action footage guiding the artists. It’s plainest with the affectlessly traced Prince Charming, who takes Snow White to his cloud-castle at the end. It’s as if they’re transcending lowly cartoon business, like Dopey chasing a soap bar, or Grumpy’s halting, thready smile as he stomps away from Snow White’s kiss.  
**Andrew Osmond, _100 Animated Feature Films_ (BFI/Palgrave Macmillan, 2010)**  
<br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEzMjM0OTAzMzddfQ==
-->