<![endif]-->

We celebrate the 50th anniversary of this chilling British horror, which only gets better with age. When a schoolgirl is reported missing, Police Sergeant Neil Howie flies to the Hebridean island of Summerisle to investigate. This creates a stir among the islanders, who claim the officer is on a fool’s errand because the girl never existed. Although all evidence points to a wasted trip, Howie’s instincts lead him to persevere, despite his distaste for the pagan leanings of the locals. It’s only then that he discovers the horrible truth.

Some five decades after its first release, _The Wicker Man_ continues to thrill. Its plausibility is what makes the film so unsettling, while its eccentricities and folklore roots provide a chilling delight.

Justin Johnson, Lead Programmer, bfi.org.uk

Come, it is time to keep your appointment with Robin Hardy’s _The Wicker Man_. Forty years old, the film burns brighter than ever across the scarred terrain of British Cinema. Famously championed by _Cinefantastique_ stateside, as far back as 1977, as ‘the _Citizen_ _Kane_ of horror’, it took longer to ignite at home, but nowadays regularly ranks high in best film polls, with its star, Christopher Lee, having declared that in it he gave his greatest performance.

Certainly his Lord Summerisle – forever statuesque in natty sports jacket and yellow polo neck atop that Scottish island cliff, arms raised, fingers strangely crooked, hair flying in the wind, in front of the flaming you-know-what – has become familiar enough that he might conceivably challenge The Count as the part for which Lee is best remembered. Which doubtless pleases him no end.

Despite all this, back in the dark days of the British film industry of the early 1970s, _The Wicker Man_, unloved and unwanted, was condemned by the very company that released it as ‘hellishly difficult to market.’ Great chunks were chopped to make it a supporting feature, ignominiously shoved out on the bottom end of a double bill with _Don’t Look Now_.

It wouldn’t have been surprising if – like many other difficult-to-label British features that litter that awkward decade – it had quietly faded into obscurity; but it didn’t. A legend grew around _The Wicker Man_, one perhaps more complex than the ingenious narrative at its heart. Its cause was taken up by a passionate band of fiercely dedicated aficionados, initially in the USA, then back in Blighty, all proudly wielding its undeserved neglect like a banner. Cut into more versions than anyone can keep track of, the film has a production history that’s shrouded in mystery and confusion. Those in the know still argue over the running times and respective merits of the ‘short’, ‘medium’ and ‘long’ _Wicker Man_. It became the text-book ‘cult’ movie, with word of its charms spread from fan to fan, in an analogue age, via whispered rumour and fanzines, back when your only chance of catching a forgotten film was if it turned up on telly late one night. And it was a 1988 BBC screening, with which Alex Cox launched his cult cinema series _Moviedrome_, that finally brought _The Wicker Man_ home. They were supposed to be showing the ‘long’ version for the very first time; but instead they showed the ‘medium’. It was all very mysterious. The flames of fascination were fanned once more.

Now, four decades since release, reappraised, scrutinised, analysed, deconstructed and obsessed over, it is the subject of painstakingly researched books and worthy academic treatises, and it features on the media studies ‘A’ level syllabus. You can buy the soundtrack – an essential purchase – or the Hollywood remake featuring Nicolas Cage in a bear suit, which is possibly not so essential. With the remastered ‘medium’ version about to see British release for the first time, _The Wicker Man_ teeters on the borders of the mainstream; perhaps elevation to the canon of cinematic greatness waits just around the corner. But in some ways that might spoil the fun.

The film grew out of Hardy’s friendship with Anthony Shaffer (author of _Sleuth_, screenwriter of _Frenzy_). Having worked together as advertising agency Hardy-Shaffer (Shaffer produced; Hardy directed), and sharing a dry, understated sense of humour, they combined forces to come up with the idea.

It’s quite a story. _The Wicker Man_ sees staunchly Christian police sergeant Howie (Edward Woodward) fly to Summerisle, a remote Scottish island, to investigate the disappearance of young Rowan Morrison. Suspicions aroused by locals’ claims that there is no such girl, Howie is led a merry dance by a bizarre assortment of apparently friendly island folk as he attempts to locate her. He is disgusted by the islanders’ overt sexuality – the youngsters enjoy mass alfresco lovemaking on the village green – and horrified by their pagan practices…

The film was evocatively shot (by Harry Waxman) on location in Scotland – one contemporary reviewer meant it as criticism when he described the ‘folk custom travelogue’ look, but this is precisely why it rings so true. The folk customs, tightly storyboarded by ex art director Hardy and derived from his study of Frazer’s _The_ _Golden Bough_, seem very authentic. Some critics have complained that they’re not that authentic – the sword-dancing comes in for particular tut-tutting – but if this is not how the customs were carried out, it is surely how they should have been. Everything is there, from corn dollies and choreographed maypole dances to the more ludicrous extremes of toads thrust into little girls’ mouths as a cure for sore throats and the gleeful hanging of ‘navel strings’ above the graves of the recently deceased.

Forty years on, _The Wicker Man_ still stands alone. Resistant to genre labels, of its time but ahead of its time, it also harks to a world outside time – a mysterious, tantalising world of indistinct folk memory, a distant Albion that lies within us all. Technological advances have not diminished our ache for something less artificial; and, as we plunge ever faster into an uncertain future, yet reach back and wonder at a shared folk history that remains just out of our grasp, _The Wicker_ _Man_’s ribald relevance is endlessly refreshed, and its earthy allure grows stronger.

‘It stands apart from time and space,’ says Hardy. ‘I think it has endured because it’s about part of this country’s life, and mythology, and existence.’ While we remain sceptical of modernity and power, and ponder what we might believe in, but still enjoy a joke and a singsong, _The Wicker Man_ will continue to tower enigmatically above us – whether we gather a good harvest or not.  
**Vic Pratt, _Sight and Sound_, October 2013**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNzI3NTEwNzA2XX0=
-->