


<![endif]-->

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot

_Good-time Girl_, made during the period when Sydney Box was in charge of production at Gainsborough, seems ­– superficially at least – very different from the ‘classic’ melodramas produced under Maurice Ostrer’s supervision. Indeed, with its contemporary focus on juvenile delinquency and the practices of courts and approved schools, it could be seen as a precursor of the spate of social problem films of the late 40s and 50s which worked through post-war anxieties about the shift in the social climate towards greater individual freedoms, social mobility and consumerism. Maurice Ostrer’s _Root of All Evil_ (1947) deals with similar questions within the ‘escapist’ women’s picture format – the story of the rise of its heroine (Phyllis Calvert) from poverty to power and wealth and her fall from grace is set in the self-consciously fictional world characteristic of popular romance. Its anti-realism was, as usual, derided and patronised by contemporary critics. While the same critic disliked the ‘squalid’ subject matter of _Good-time Girl_, they were prepared to admire its realistic treatment of a serious social subject.

From today’s perspective, such a response seems surprising. The film’s ‘realism’ resides almost entirely in two short sequences framing the main story, which is told in flashback. In these, a runaway teenage girl (Diana Dors) is brought by a fatherly policeman before the chairwoman of a juvenile court (Flora Robson) who attempts to set her back on the straight and narrow with the moral tale of another girl, Gwen Rawlings (Jean Kent), whose efforts to control her own destiny met with disastrous results. The story of Gwen’s descent into the underworld is filmed in expressionist _noir_ style, which is very different in tone from the framing sequences (although certain scenes are clearly meant to boost the authenticity – Gwen’s unjust sentencing by the juvenile courts, for instance, or the speech given by the head of the approved school about the lack of resources which accounts for the inadequacies of the juvenile penal system). These scenes of social realism (the result of careful research into Royal Commission reports by the filmmakers) sit uneasily with the brooding chiaroscuro of Gwen’s transformation from gutsy, independent young woman into thief and murderess, seen as the result of exploitation, injustice, and institutional blindness. The film’s endorsement of Gwen’s refusal to knuckle under to an unjust system is then sabotaged by a moralistic conclusion which has none of the ambiguities characteristic of the women’s picture.

In spite of its moralism, _Good-time Girl_ is interesting as a film trying to negotiate conflicting ideological and institutional pressures at a time of transition. In the context of the shift from wartime to post-war social and sexual mores, the problem posed by the film is one of social control – the need to draw boundaries to contain the potential excesses contingent upon the new sexual and economic emancipation of women (the breakdown of the family unit, the desire for wealth and consumer goods after a period of austerity, and so on), without sacrificing the qualities essential to a civilised society – compassion, freedom of choice, independence of spirit, etc. In order to accommodate these changes, social institutions have to be redefined – the authoritarian patriarchal family and a repressive legal system must give way to a softer, liberal paternalism. In _Good-time Girl_, Gwen’s downfall is shown to be less the result of her lack of moral fibre than of an intransigent society’s failure to recognise her good qualities. As a result, she moves beyond rebellion into cynicism and social irresponsibility, culminating in the death of the man she loves and a fifteen-year prison sentence. When told this story, Diana Dors’ young runaway decides to return home to her  family rather than follow Gwen’s path.

Taken together with the opening sequence in which the chairwoman and the policeman discuss how to deal with the young ‘offender’, this resolution suggests that the relationship between the representatives of social order and the potential delinquent is no longer as authoritarian as they were in Gwen’s story. Seen in this light, _Good-time Girl_ falls more into line with other Gainsborough melodramas: conflict and excess are shown to be things of the past; balance, harmony and unity the characteristics of the present. And it is also typical of the sense that the violent excesses of the past are more powerfully and seductively  presented than the constituents of the new enlightened order, which is treated rather perfunctorily as though in a token gesture of civilised British values.

This was certainly due partly to an economic motive, for in spite of Box’s pretensions to artistic merit, to serious social subject matter, he (like other Gainsborough producers before him) had more than an eye on  the box-office value of sadism and violence. (The film incurred the censor’s wrath for some of its more violent scenes, justified by the filmmakers in terms of their realism – Muriel Box interviewed in _Gainsborough Melodrama_, BFI Dossier No.18.) The underworld sequences of _Good-time Girl_ are exotic and glamorous: the drabness of institutional life is set against the stylishness of the world to which Gwen is attracted. The ‘moral’ of the story is clear  (excessive consumerism is wrong), but the fantasy of unbridled consumption and ‘good times’ is activated to appeal to audiences (particularly women) tired of wartime austerity and looking forward to greater economic freedom. Box’s _régime_ at Gainsborough may have seemed to herald a different kind of product from the more blatantly escapist costume dramas and women’s pictures; none the less, _Good-Time Girl_ shares more with those films than is immediately apparent.  
**Pam Cook, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, September 1985**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE3NzYxNDEwNTRdfQ==
-->