
In a case of fiction eclipsing reality, the TARDIS displaces more cultural water than any genuine police box glimpsed in archive footage or a film like _The Blue Lamp_ (1950), as if C. S. Lewis were so widely read that _all_ wardrobes were seen primarily as portals to Narnia. On screen before the Doctor, his companions, the Daleks, the sonic screwdriver or even the title of the first episode, the TARDIS is the _only_ constant in the show – which is ironic in that the machine is supposed to change shape to match wherever it happens to materialise but gets stuck as a police box when the ‘camouflage unit’ fails early in ‘The Cave of Skulls’. Boiled down to its simplest format, _Doctor Who_ is a character actor and a police box. On its first appearance, the TARDIS gives off an electrical sound and ‘feels alive’ to the touch; though the interior would continue to thrum, these external signifiers of alienness would be phased out, until the TV movie and revival series decided that the time machine was practically a living thing.

Our way into the box, a doorway to the infinite, is through Barbara Wright and Ian Chesterton, teachers at Coal Hill School. Hearing Susan’s voice inside the police box, Ian and Barbara brush aside the Doctor’s objections and stumble in to find that (like the wardrobe in _The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe_) the TARDIS is bigger inside than it is outside. The teachers are astonished. This moment will be repeated over and over, almost as a rite of passage for every regular on the show. It’s such a mind-stretching concept that it has to be hashed over several times in clunky dialogue: ‘You’ve discovered television, haven’t you?’ snips the Doctor, unhelpfully – reasoning that there is an equivalence between showing an enormous building on a small screen and the inside-out dimensions of his time-space machine. There are solid production reasons for the TARDIS’s nature: the control room is a spacious, standing set (blinding white walls with signature roundels and the hexagonal central control console) while the police box is a moveable prop. At first, the interior seems to consist of this one room and the exterior might be an illusion: the doors open directly to the outside world and, seen from within the TARDIS, match the design of the control room, only taking the form of police box doors when looked at from the outside.

Later, a few other areas would be seen including back-up control rooms, like the wood-panelled version introduced in ‘The Masque of Mandragora’ (1976) when the production team got fed up with a hold-over set that had remained essentially a black-and-white design even after the show began to be made in colour. The possibility that the TARDIS’s interior wasn’t just bigger than the outside but _infinite_ would be touched on from time to time but never quite take hold. The 1996 and 2005 revivals make the time machine a living, perhaps sentient thing with a habit of swallowing evil people whole and an energy source that might threaten any world the ship had stopped off on (invariably Earth) if mishandled (of course, this repetition could be down to Russell T. Davies cribbing the finale of ‘Boom Town’ from the last act of Matthew Jacobs’ TV movie script).

At once a home and a ship, the TARDIS soon became cosy – though it breaks down often to suit the plot and prevent the Doctor from becoming too omnipotent a figure to be embroiled in various adventures. Originally, Susan states she invented the name, an acronym for ‘Time and Relative Dimension in Space’ (sometimes ‘Dimensions’). The TARDIS is a utopian playroom, as opposed to the dystopian playroom that would show up in ‘The Celestial Toymaker’. It is as safe as being snug under the bedcovers, and similarly offers transport to dreams and nightmares. Occasionally, to demonstrate its essentially magical nature, the TARDIS would take the Doctor and companions not to another time or planet but to a limbo, dreamworld or alternative dimension, most successfully the ‘Land of Fiction’ in ‘The Mind Robber’ (1968). It is at once home base and vehicle, combining the functions of Marineville and Stingray or Tracy Island and the Thunderbirds; but, in contrast to the technophile kindergarten of Gerry Anderson’s shows, there would be no schematics for the TARDIS, no blueprints to limit its dimensions. As a home, it isn’t that practical – the control room has surprisingly few _chairs,_ hence a great deal of standing around or falling about.

The TARDIS has that near-inviolability common to 221B or the Batcave: for a while, it seems the time machine only admits friendly folk, offering safe haven from any Daleks or cavemen who might be ranting and fuming outside its indestructible, impregnable shell. Even early on, the show is finding ways of using this sense of a reassuring home base to tighten the screws. At the end of ‘The Survivors’, Episode Two of ‘The Daleks’, Susan alone returns to the comfort of the TARDIS after a journey through the radioactive jungles of Skaro. She takes a moment to overcome her inclination to stay in this secure environment before forcing herself into the threatening world outside to save her companions. Most cliffhangers depend on climaxes of danger or revelation, but this is a rare instance of heroism as slingshot into next week’s action. Frequently malfunctioning, a randomising element that serves to generate entire plots or more often to prevent too-easy escape from a story in progress, the TARDIS is nevertheless the show’s safe house. Just as Dr Grimesby Roylott would explode into Holmes’ rooms for shock effect in ‘The Speckled Band’, _Doctor Who_ would eventually, if sparingly, have the TARDIS invaded by Cybermen or Sontarans to indicate more than ordinary peril. Originally, writers were cautioned against using the TARDIS too much as a plot device – it got the heroes to and from places, but did not solve their problems; Russell T. Davies would ignore this in ‘The Parting of the Ways’ (2005), in which the ‘telepathic’ vessel’s conduit to the awesome forces of time and space is used to save the day, though at the cost of a lead actor.  
**Kim Newman, _BFI TV Classics: Doctor Who_ (BFI Publishing, 2005)**

**With special thanks to the BBC, Simon Gurrier, Mike Tucker, Mark Ayers, Malcolm Thornton, _Doctor Who Magazine_ and Ed Stradling.**
<br><br>


<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMzE2MzA1MTI0XX0=
-->