
<![endif]-->

Despite being an accomplished screenwriter and Britain’s most prolific female director, Muriel Box is little remembered today. Join us for this season introduction event as filmmaker Carol Morley, journalist Rachel Cooke and academic Melanie Williams join season curator Josephine Botting to discuss Box’s trailblazing career and reflect on the difficulties women still face in making their mark on the industry.  
**bfi.org.uk**

Muriel Violette Baker was born in New Malden on the outskirts of London in September 1905, the third child of a family she described as Respectable Poor. Influenced by her mother’s progressive, left-wing ideas, Muriel developed a passion for writing, theatre and cinema, attempting unsuccessfully to become a professional actress and ballet dancer. She gained low-level employment in the film industry, including work as a continuity girl for British International Pictures, but the key event was her marriage to Sydney Box in 1935, which nurtured a mutual talent for playwriting. They completed nearly forty short plays before the outbreak of war in 1939. During the war, Muriel assisted her husband in running Verity Films, gaining her first experience of directing with _The English Inn_ (1941), a typical Verity propaganda short produced for the British Council. The Boxes moved into features, achieving a spectacular hit with _The Seventh Veil_, the highest grossing British film of 1945, which won them an Oscar for Best Original Screenplay.

On the strength of this success, Sydney was invited by the Rank Organisation to take over Gainsborough Pictures, where Muriel ran the scenario department. The emphasis was on volume production, but many of the Boxes’ screenplays – such as _The Years Between_ (Compton Bennett, 1946) or _Good-Time Girl_ (David Macdonald, 1948) – emphasise the problems women face in their struggle to gain recognition or independence. Muriel occasionally assisted as dialogue director, or re-shot scenes that needed attention in post-production. On _The Lost People_ (1949), about the plight of European refugees, she was credited as co-director for the very substantial reworking she deemed necessary.

When Sydney left Rank to set up London Independent Producers in 1951, Muriel was allowed more opportunity to direct. The majority of her films were stage adaptations: _The Happy Family_ (1952), _To Dorothy a Son_ (1954), _Simon and Laura_ (1955), _This Other Eden_ (1959), _Subway in the Sky_ (1959), _Too_ _Young to Love_ (1960) and _Rattle of a Simple Man_ (1964). Her directorial energies were channelled into eliciting strong performances from the actors; visually the films are competent and unfussy, with a preference for medium shots, allowing the audience to concentrate on dialogue and the telling glance or gesture. The films have a stage-bound feel, and rarely venture out on to location. The most successful, precisely because it thrives on such artifice, is _Simon and Laura_, Alan Melville’s acerbic satire of early television ‘soaps’, where Kay Kendall and Peter Finch play an idealised couple who are actually the reverse of their real selves.

Box’s films are notable for their strong, often topical and controversial themes. _This Other Eden_ raises a number of complex issues about Irish politics, commemoration, hypocrisy and illegitimacy. _Too Young to Love_, which addressed the problem of teenage sex, abortion and syphilis, was sufficiently contentious to be banned by several local authorities. The semi-documentary _Street Corner_ (1953), based on Muriel and Sydney’s original screenplay, was a complement to _The Blue Lamp_ (Basil Dearden, 1950), emphasising the courage and capabilities of women police officers. It formed part of Box’s repeated attempts to foreground women’s experiences, her most important subject.

In her version of the famous Somerset Maugham tale _The Beachcomber_ (1954), it is the pluck and tenacity of the missionary Martha (Glynis Johns) that dominates the film. _Simon and Laura_, _The Passionate Stranger_ (1957), _The Truth about Women_ (1958) and _Rattle of a Simple Man_ were all comedies about the gulf that exists between the sexes whose needs and aspirations are quite different, and between fantasy and reality. Box described _The Truth about Women_ as ‘the film personally significant to me above all others’, a ‘comedy with serious undertones concerning the status of women in various societies from the turn of the century until today’. She was dismayed when the distributors, British Lion, refused it a West End premiere, an indication that its subject was uncomfortable for a patriarchal industry.

Box experienced other forms of prejudice. Michael Balcon doubted her competence to direct a large-scale feature film, a modern Romeo and Juliet story that she had written in 1950, and the project was aborted. In 1952 the Boxes pretended that the direction of _The Happy Family_ was a joint affair, but when word leaked out that Muriel was directing on her own, one of the principal financial backers, John Woolf, withdrew. She was particularly hurt when other women, Jean Simmons in _So Long at the Fair_ (1950), and Kay Kendall in _Simon and Laura_, wished to have her replaced as a director. Simmons was powerful enough to get her way and Terence Fisher was given the director’s slot. In the press her position as one of the very few women directors in the British film industry was frequently noted, but usually condescendingly.

However, she was a role model for young women. Her chequered career illustrates the difficulties for a woman working in the film industry, and also its volatility, particularly in the 1950s and 60s when she and her husband struggled to retain a measure of independence and integrity. She left film-making after the tepid reception of _Rattle of a Simple Man_, but continued to write novels and she set up a successful publishing house, Femina, which offered a more rewarding outlet for her feminism. She died in London on 18 May 1991. If Muriel Box never directed a masterpiece, her oeuvre remains the most significant achievement of a women director in the British film industry.  
**Andrew Spicer, _Directors in British and Irish Cinema_ quoted on screenonline.org.uk**  

**Carol Morley** is a writer and director. Her feature films include the upcoming road movie _Typist Artist Pirate King_ about artist Audrey Amiss, starring Monica Dolan, Kelly Macdonald and Gina McKee; New Orleans set noir _Out of Blue_, starring Patricia Clarkson, James Caan, Jacki Weaver and Toby Jones; _The Falling_, an exploration of a mysterious outbreak of fainting in a 1969 girls’ school, starring Florence Pugh and Morfydd Clark in their first film roles alongside Maisie Williams, Maxine Peake and Greta Scacchi; _Dreams of a Life_, which stars Zawe Ashton and goes behind the anonymous newspaper headline about Joyce Vincent who lay dead in her flat for three years; and the Grierson Award winning _The Alcohol Years_, revisiting the people that populated Morley’s teenage life on the Manchester music scene. She also writes and broadcasts on films and directors, including an essay for a book accompanying the Criterion Essential Fellini box set release, and a Radio 3 documentary _Carol and Muriel_, about Muriel Box.  

**Rachel Cooke** is an award-winning journalist. A writer and columnist at  _The Observer_, she is also the television critic of the _New Statesman_. Her essays are regularly broadcast on BBC Radio 3, most recently the series _The Odd Woman_. Her book, _Her Brilliant Career: Ten Extraordinary Women of the Fifties_, is published by Virago. She is currently editing a new literary anthology for Virago.  

**Melanie Williams** is Professor of Film and Television Studies at the University of East Anglia. A specialist in British film history, she is the author of numerous books on the topic, including _Female Stars of British Cinema_, _David Lean_, _Transformation and Tradition in 1960s British Cinema_, and a BFI Film Classic book on _A Taste of Honey_. She is currently working towards a book on Muriel Box.  

**Dr Josephine Botting** is a Curator at the BFI National Archive and author of _Adrian Brunel and British Cinema of the 1920s_.  
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTExNzg3NjA2MDJdfQ==
-->