<![endif]-->

_Three Colours: Blue_ is part of a trilogy which bands together three films, _Blue_, _White_ and _Red_ – the colours of the French flag – under the loose headings Liberty, Equality, Fraternity, and can be seen in some ways as Kieslowski the Pole coming to terms with becoming, so to speak, a French filmmaker under the auspices of French producer Marin Karmitz. _Blue_’s relationship to the concept of liberty is deeply ironic here, since Kieslowski, as we shall see, regards absolute freedom and love as opposites.

Schooled in the virtues of neorealist visual storytelling, sumptuously photographed in 35mm colour and impeccably pared down to its vital essences, _Blue_ devotes the vast bulk of its screen time to gazing at Juliette Binoche, an actress of great talent and beauty, as she goes about doing remarkably everyday things. But the film is far from an enraptured hymn to graceful looks and elegant posturing. It’s savage irony and remarkable austerity that hold sway.

The story begins with a car crash in which Julie de Courcy (Binoche), though only injured herself, loses her famous composer husband and her child Anna. Failing at suicide, she decides to erase the traces of her marriage and withdraw from the world. Though she has everyone’s sympathy, Julie does her best to push everyone away. ‘You’ve changed,’ says a music journalist. ‘You were never so abrasive or unpleasant. What happened?’ ‘Don’t you know?’ responds Julie. ‘We had a car crash. My daughter was killed. So was  
my husband.’

_Blue_ treats Julie as someone trying desperately to brush off hurtful connections. She soon finds, however, that no matter how many cobweb strands she removes, near-invisible remnants trail around with her. Hers is an unusual kind of extreme grief expressed in a need to clear the entire past out of her mind, as if to continue any part of what was would corrupt what it had meant to her. This stringent, otherworldly idealism is constantly tested by arbitrarily cruel, kind and ironic interruptions in the form of apparently chance meetings with journalists, her husband’s colleagues, new neighbours, a would-be lover, a street musician, a pregnant mouse and the witness to the car crash. But her emphatic behaviour also presents the viewer with the unexpected – for instance, her sudden summoning of her husband’s partner Olivier to have sex with her when she realises he’s in love with her, done seemingly in the hope that once he’s fucked her, he’ll realise how ordinary she is and let her go.

The way _Blue_ treats its first 15 minutes is part of what makes it so unique to cinema and to its own time. A comparison between the fullness of the script and what ended up in the final edit is illustrative of Kieslowski’s absolutist approach to his craft. In the finished film, a great deal of exposition and description gets condensed almost wordlessly into telling images.

Kieslowski and his writer Krzysztof Piesiewicz have a difficult trick to pull off whereby it’s the things that Julie is renouncing – and we can’t help thinking here about the Catholic tradition of renouncing worldly things in order to be closer to the spiritual – that help us to fill in who she has been. There’s an irony in getting to know a character just at the point when she wants no one to know any more: it’s like raiding someone’s garbage can.

Our introduction to Julie is mediated through images that respond to her state of mind. Bizarre perspectives, Dutch tilts and abrupt changes of scale abound. And by planting all this material on screen uncontextualised by voiceover or much dialogue, _Blue_ presumes, rightly, that the viewer has the sensitivity and intelligence to infer everything. This trust in the audience is one of the things that makes _Blue_ such a 90s film, because it recognises the sophistication in image-reading that most of us, as denizens of the late 20th century, possess.

_Blue_ concentrates much of its effort on depicting a woman determined to be an enigma – an intelligent woman who, for most of the film, has little interest in living men – and portrays her with a uniquely visually and aurally dependent aesthetic born of documentary but fulfilled in almost abstract compositions. The film is put together with ruthless felicity yet is as bleak and harrowing as a fateful film should be. Politically it captures many of the ironies of the freedom espoused by the ‘me’ generation, yet it never patronises either its characters or its audiences. On an allegorical level it could also be about Europe’s futile attempt to wipe the memory of its fractious history – otherwise why the trilogy? Who knows?

_Blue_ is very much an auteurist film in the old-fashioned sense in that it represents the work of six craftspeople at the top of their form, many of whom had worked together before. There’s Kieslowski himself, screenwriter Krzysztof Piesiewicz (who started working with Kieslowski on _No End_, 1984, and went on to _Dekalog_, 1988, and _The Double Life of Véronique_, 1991), composer Zbigniew Preisner (who worked on the same films), cinematographer Slawomir Idziak (who joined the regular team for _Dekalog_), sound recordist Jean-Claude Laureux (a favourite of Louis Malle) and lastly Juliette Binoche, whose performance, in a career of strict, intelligent underplaying, may be her most subtle ever.

If cinema as art is still alive, it will be in a large part due to filmmakers like Kieslowski who know the whole history of their craft and yet revivified their means and methods constantly, however modest the scale.

Nick James, _Sight and Sound_, April 2002


<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE5NjIyOTU4OTFdfQ==
-->