<![endif]-->

**Clio Barnard on ‘The Arbor’**

_Let’s talk about Andrea Dunbar first, and why she was of interest to you, in terms of where you come from yourself._

I grew up in Yorkshire, near Bradford, so it was a local place to go and see bands or films or go ice-skating, and I’m that same generation as Andrea Dunbar, so when I saw _Rita, Sue and Bob Too_, Rita and Sue seemed very familiar to me. They were like girls I was at school with. I really liked the friendship between the two girls and the fact that the film is very unmoralistic about them enjoying sex with this guy. They were the sort of girls at school that you looked up to because they were very experienced. I recognise that part of the world and the clothes they were wearing – it’s my era. And I really like the writing, the vitality of it. I really like Alan Clarke’s work too, though I don’t think _Rita, Sue and Bob Too_ is his greatest film – it’s not his most innovative piece  
of work.

I’m not really a theatre person – I’ve never seen _Rita, Sue and Bob Too_ in the theatre. But I was curious to read it. It had been reprinted with _A State Affair_ [Robin Soans’ 2000 follow-up to the play], which revisits Butterworth a decade after Andrea Dunbar’s death – and which I didn’t know anything about. I didn’t know about verbatim theatre either. But the techniques of verbatim theatre related to [my short film] _Random Acts of Intimacy_, where I’d used this technique of actors lip-synching to voices gathered in interviews, and the reason I did that was to create a deliberate gap between reality and representation, or at least make you aware of the gap. What’s interesting is that verbatim theatre aspires to be a kind of documentary theatre. I was interested that it would do the opposite in my bits of film.

_The opposite being?_

The opposite being deliberately making you aware of the illusion rather than trying to collapse it or make it smaller. It widens the gap – or draws attention to the gap. I was also interested in that idea of returning to the same place – the idea that a play or a film constructs an ending, but places don’t have endings, they continue. So the initial idea was to go back a third time, another decade on, to see what had changed, but also to reflect on the previous representations of the estate. In a way I didn’t really set out to make a film about Andrea Dunbar – that kind of emerged in the process of meeting people and doing interviews.

_And then the film sort of follows on with Andrea Dunbar’s children._

There’s lots of different layers in the film, so it becomes quite complicated  
to describe…

_Please take us through them, one at a time._

There are three elements to the film. There are actors that are synched to the voices of people gathered in interview – who are Andrea Dunbar’s family, and in particular her children. And there’s also a performance of her play _The Arbor_ on Brafferton Arbor, the street where she grew up. It was her first play, which she wrote when she was 15. And the third element is archive footage of Andrea and her family. Some of it is Andrea when she’s 18 years old with her baby daughter Lorraine, who becomes the focus of my film as it develops. And also Andrea when she was 28, talking about her work almost retrospectively although she was still so young, her career was almost over because she died when she was 29.

_What about the tension between you as an artist and her as a writer? On one hand, you’re representing her work, but you’re framing it in a particular way so that it’s also your work – you have to take possession of it yourself. Did you think about that, or did you just go with it?_

I suppose I just went with it. There’s something she does in her play _The Arbor_ where the girl, who is essentially Andrea, introduces us to a scene by looking straight at the audience – or in this case, looking straight down the lens. To me, that was the equivalent of what I was doing with the lip-synching: it’s a direct address – the interviewees look straight down the lens, something you wouldn’t get in a conventional talking-head documentary, where the eye-line would be slightly off.

Andrea’s daughters have a very different account of her. I was very interested in that. If there’s a common thread through my work, it’s about the relationship between memory and imagination. They both had very different memories of Andrea. Lisa, her younger daughter, remembers her as a writer who would lock herself away in the bedroom to write. Whereas Lorraine’s memory is completely different – it’s that her mum was going out drinking and it was all abusive parenting and neglect. And I suppose the tensions in Andrea’s life were partly about having represented that community and her family through these plays – and the difficulties of then continuing to live in this community, having exposed them, as well as herself, to the world. I definitely related to those tensions.

What I found really brilliant about her letters to Max Stafford-Clark, the director of her plays, was that they were all about childcare. You know, ‘I need someone to look after Lorraine, and maybe I can bring her down to rehearsals with me.’ I admire her for being upfront about it and for producing the amount of work that she produced, being a single parent with very young children and in that environment.

_I was wondering whether making this film has in any way altered your view of the type of work you might do in the future._

Yeah, I’m not going back to my bottom drawer to take out scripts I’ve written in the past. It’s made a massive change. To some extent, I think it’s changed my politics, in that it’s strengthened some kind of resolve somewhere. I haven’t really fully processed it yet. There’s a lot of things that I didn’t know about in a first-hand way that I know about now – that’s made a massive difference.

Interview by Nick James, _Sight and Sound_, November 2010

<![endif]-->

**THE ARBOR**

_Director:_ Clio Barnard

©: Artangel Media Ltd., UK Film Council

_Production Company:_ Artangel

_Presented by:_ Artangel Trust

_In association with:_ Jerwood Charitable Foundation, Arts Council England, More4

_Made with the support of:_  
UK Film Council’s New Cinema Fund,  
UK Film Council’s Development Fund

_Executive Producer:_ Michael Morris

_Producer:_ Tracy O’Riordan

_For Artangel: Co-directors:_ James Lingwood, Michael Morris; _Administrative Director:_ Cressidra Hubbard; _Head of Press & Publicity:_ Janette Scott; _Development & Publicity Co-ordinator:_ Sarah Davies

_For UK Film Council: Head of New Cinema Fund:_ Lenny Crooks; _New Cinema Fund Executive:_ Emily Anderton; _Senior Business Affairs Executive:_ Geraldine Atlee; _Head of Production:_ Fiona Morham; _Production Finance:_ Amanda Pyne

_For More4: Editor:_ Tabitha Jackson; _Production Finance Manager:_ Rebecca O’Connor; _Commercial Affairs Manager:_ Tiffany Turner; _Lawyer, Legal & Compliance:_ Hamish Thomson

_Production Manager:_ Scott James Bassett

_Additional Filming Production Manager:_  
Ameenah Ayub

_Production Co-ordinator:_ Jess Gormley

_Production Accountant:_ Helen Bingham

_Location Manager:_ Vinnie Jassal

_Additional Filming Location Manager:_ Asha Sharma

_Post-production Supervisors:_ Meg Clark,  
Ameenah Ayub

_1st Assistant Director:_ Peter Nightingale

_2nd Assistant Director:_ Matt Grimwood

_3rd Assistant Director:_ Alex Grasham

_Script Supervisor:_ Sylvia Parker

_Casting:_ Amy Hubbard

_Casting Assistants:_ Julia Gruen, Samantha Colley

_Screenplay:_ Clio Barnard

_Director of Photography:_ Ole Birkeland

_Additional Filming 2nd Unit Camera Operator:_  
David McCormick

_1st Assistant Camera:_ Jason Walker

_2nd Assistant Camera:_ Adam Scarth

_Additional Filming 2nd Unit Assistant Camera:_  
Matt Howard

_Gaffer:_ Michael Onder

_Grip:_ Steve Sheppard

_Stills Photographers:_ Nick Wall, Susanna Wyatt

_Visual Effects by:_ The Bluff Hampton Company

_(Visual Effects Producer:_ Piers Hampton;  
_Visual Effects Supervisor:_ Sean Farrow_)_

_Graphic Artist:_ Alex Toomey

_Editors:_ Nick Fenton, Daniel Goddard

_Production Designer:_ Matthew Button

_Art Director:_ Daniela Faggio

_Standby Art Director:_ Luke Gledsdale

_Additional Filming Standby Art Director:_  
Emma Clough

_Art Department Co-ordinator:_ George Mizen

_Set Decorator:_ Cathy Featherstone

_Prop Master:_ Marius Pogaceanu

_Costume Designer:_ Matthew Price

_Wardrobe Supervisor:_ Eloise Park

_Make-up & Hair Designer:_ Sue Wyburgh

_Make-up/Hair Assistants:_ Maxine Mitchell,  
Jane Oginsky, Helen Gant

_Additional Filming Make-up Assistant:_ Kavita Kaul

_Digital Main Titles & End Roller Design:_ Matt Curtis

_Composers:_ Harry Escott, Molly Nyman

_Music Performed by:_  
members of the Samphire Band

_Music Supervisor:_ Lucy Bright

_Music Recording Engineer:_ Ian Wood

_Music Mixed by:_ Harry Escott

_Sound Designer:_ Tim Barker

_Interviews Recorded by:_ Clio Barnard

_Sound Recordist:_ Tim Barker

_Boom Operator:_ Alan MacFeely

_Additional Filming Boom Operator:_  
Gernot Fuhrmann

_Re-recording Mixer:_ Richard Davey

_Foley Supervisor:_ Tim Alban

_Foley Editor:_ Chris Treble

_Sales & Distribution Consultant:_ Dhiraj Mahey

_Archive Footage courtesy of:_ BBC Motion Gallery, ITN Source

_Filmed with:_ Red One Digital Camera

_Camera & Grip Equipment:_ Ice Films

_Lighting Equipment:_ Arri Lighting Rental

_Digital Grading by:_ LipSync Post

_Cast:_

Manjinder Virk _(Lorraine Dunbar)_

Neil Dudgeon _(Steve Saul)_

Monica Dolan _(Ann Hamilton)_

Danny Webb _(Max Stafford-Clark & the father)_

Christine Bottomley _(Lisa Thompson)_

Natalie Gavin _(the girl)_

Kathryn Pogson _(Pamela Dunbar)_

George Costigan _(Jimmy ‘the Wig’)_

Matthew McNulty _(Andrew Dunbar)_

Jonathan Jaynes _(David Dunbar)_

Robert Emms _(young David)_

Kate Rutter _(the mother)_

Gary Whitaker _(Gary Whitaker)_

Jimi Mistry _(Yousaf)_

Parvani Lingiah _(young Lorraine)_

Liam Price _(Billy)_

Robert Haythorne _(Fred)_

Josh Brown _(policeman)_

Jamie Timlin _(Jamie Timlin)_

Richard Dunbar _(Peter)_

Scott Brandon _(Chris)_

Anne-Marie Barwell _(Gemma Norman)_

Shelly Norman _(Shelly Norman)_

Daphne Gormley _(Kaitlin)_

Lizzie Roper _(Kathy Dunbar)_

Chantelle Dunbar _(Karen)_

Moey Hassan _(bus conductor)_

Gemma Booth _(Cath)_

Maxine Crome _(Maureen)_

Kulvinder Ghir _(Rafee)_

Taron Tutt _(Saif)_

UK 2010©

94 mins
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTU0NDQxOTE3OF19
-->