<![endif]-->

_+ Q&A with actors Vinette Robinson, Stephen Graham, Hannah Walters, Stephen Odubola, director Philip Barantini and writer James Cummings. Chaired by critic  
Rhianna Dhillon._

Eight months after her mentor Andy Jones suffered a heart attack, head chef Carly is battling to forge a name for new Dalston restaurant Point North alongside her old kitchen crew. We follow the team as the stresses of keeping the restaurant running bear down on them amidst a hospitality industry in crisis. With the pressure to draw in new, hungry customers and the financial squeeze to keep the business profitable, the team must find a way to manage their complicated personal lives whilst creating quality food day in day out.

**Philip Barantini** is an award-winning BAFTA and BIFA-nominated director who started his career in 1996 as an actor, appearing in _Band of Brothers_, _Ned_ _Kelly_ and _Chernobyl_, among others. Philip’s critically acclaimed second directorial feature _Boiling_ _Point_ was nominated for four BAFTAs in 2022, including Outstanding British Film, and received 11 BIFA nominations. Philip was awarded the  Breakthrough British Filmmaker at The Big Screen Awards 2022, alongside a further six nominations for _Boiling_ _Point_ which included Best British Film of the Year. He won Best Rock Video at the 2022 UKMVAs for his music video for Sam Fender’s ‘Spit of You’. April 2023 saw the release of ITV’s thriller series _Malpractice_, starring Niamh Algar, with all five episodes directed by Philip. We can soon look forward to his next feature, _Accused_, which is due for release on 22  September on Netflix UK. Philip was a co-creator and executive producer on the _Boiling_ _Point_ series with It’s All Made Up Productions and he directed episodes one and two. He will soon commence filming his next exciting feature film, with more details to be announced in due course.

**James Cummings** is a BAFTA nominated screenwriter and co-creator of BBC’s _Boiling Point_. James led the writing team on series one and wrote across all four episodes. He returns after co-writing the highly acclaimed feature of the same name, garnering him nominations for Outstanding British Film and Outstanding Debut at the 75th BAFTA Film Awards. In 2023, he will also see the release of his second feature as screenwriter, the home invasion thriller _Accused_, co-written with Barnaby Boulton. James is a longtime collaborator with director and co-creator of _Boiling Point_ Philip Barantini, having met on a third year uni project that James had co-written and that starred Phil as an actor. Since then, they have specialised in projects with strong social messages and a focus on realism in their technical approach.

Award-winning actress **Vinette Robinson** reprises her role as ‘Carly’ in _Boiling Point_ – now head chef at an upmarket London restaurant. The role won Vinette Best Supporting Actress at BIFA. Later this year, Vinette is set to appear in the second season of Sky’s _The Lazarus Project_, a sci-fi action drama series centred around a secret government agency that prevents mass extinction events with the technology to turn back time. Vinette stars as Janet, alongside a cast that includes Paapa Essiedu and Tom Burke. With TV credits that include _The A Word_, _Sherlock_, _Close to the Enemy_, _Six Four_ and _Black_ _Mirror_, Vinette also has an established career onstage. Her previous theatre credits include _Emilia_ (The Globe), _Albion_  (Almeida Theatre), _Hamlet_ (Young Vic), _Tender Napalm_ (Southwark Playhouse) and _Welcome To Thebes_  (National Theatre).

**Stephen Graham** was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2023 New Year Honours List for his services to Drama.

Stephen has enjoyed continued success following his critically acclaimed performance in the 2007 BAFTA Best British Film winner_This Is England_, directed by Shane Meadows, together with the follow-up Channel 4 mini-series:_This Is England ‘86, ‘88_ and_‘90_,which also secured him a Best Leading Actor TV BAFTA nomination. Other notable credits include Jimmy McGovern’s  _Accused_opposite Sean Bean, for which Stephen received his first Best Supporting Actor TV BAFTA nomination. Stephen is also known for playing the iconic role of Al Capone opposite Steve Buscemi in all five seasons of Martin Scorsese’s  _Boardwalk Empire_for HBO.

In recent years Stephen’s TV credits include Jeff Pope’s_Little Boy Blue_ and  _White House Farm Murders_, as well as the highly acclaimed BBC1 series  _Line of Duty_. Stephen was nominated for his second Best Supporting Actor award at the 2019 BAFTA TV Awards for Sky’s_Save Me_, created by Lennie James. 2020 saw the return of Stephen teaming up again with Shane Meadows for C4’s  _The Virtues_, which earned him the RTS TV Award for Best Actor and a second BAFTA TV nomination for Best Leading Actor.

In 2021, Stephen appeared in Andrew Haigh’s_The North Water_for BBC1, alongside Colin Farrell. In the same year, Stephen collaborated as an executive producer with Jimmy McGovern and Sean Bean in the BBC1 prison series  _Time_, for which Stephen won Best Actor at the BPG Awards and was nominated for Best Supporting Actor at the 2022 BAFTA TV Awards. Stephen also executive produced and starred in_Help_in 2021; Jack Thorne’s critically acclaimed feature length C4 drama, alongside Jodie Comer, which earned Stephen nominations for Leading Actor at the 2022 BAFTA TV Awards and Best Actor at the 2022 Satellite Awards.

Stephen’s film credits include his portrayal of Baby Face Nelson opposite Johnny Depp and Christian Bale in_Public Enemies_, and_Pirates of the Caribbean_, opposite Johnny Depp and Penelope Cruz. Other credits include  _Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy_, Idris Elba’s directorial debut  _Yardie_and_Journey’s End_opposite Paul Bettany, Sam Claflin and Asa Butterfield. 2019 saw Stephen feature in Elton John biopic,_Rocketman_. Stephen starred in Scorsese’s Netflix feature_The Irishman_as Tony ‘Pro’ Provenzano opposite Al Pacino and Robert De Niro. In 2020, Stephen starred in_Greyhound_alongside Tom Hanks and filmed Marvel’s_Venom: Let There Be Carnage_alongside Tom Hardy.

In 2019 Stephen set up Matriarch Productions which released their first project  _Boiling Point_in 2021, earning Stephen Leading Actor nominations for both BIFA 2021 and film BAFTAs 2022. Stephen recently appeared as Mr Wormwood in Netflix’s much-anticipated feature film  _Matilda_ (2022). Upcoming appearances include a lead role opposite Daisy Ridley in Disney’s_Young Woman and the Sea_; Netflix’s mind-bending graphic novel adaptation  _Bodies_opposite Shira Haas; starring in and executive producing _A Thousand Blows_for Disney+; starring opposite Saoirse Ronan in_Blitz_,a film directed by Steve McQueen which follows the lives of Londoners during the Second World War German bombing campaign.

**Hannah Walters’** upcoming projects include BBC film _Sweet Sue_ and Disney +/Hulu’s anticipated British boxing drama, _A Thousand Blows_ as Eliza Moody. Hannah’s notable film credits include Fox’s _Walk like a Panther_, _Funny Cow_, starring Maxine Peake, Disney’s _Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales_, and BIFA Best Film _This Is England_  (2006), written and directed by Shane Meadows. In television, Hannah is most known for her roles in series 3 and 4 of BBC crime drama _Whitechapel_, as DC Megan Riley; and her regular role in _This Is England ‘86, ‘88_ and _‘90_ shown on Channel 4 in 2010, 2011 and 2015. Her other television credits include roles in ITV’s _Malpractice_ and _Pru_  and _Time_ for the BBC. Alongside Stephen Graham, she co-founded Matriarch Productions, an entertainment production company who aims to provide a much-needed platform for underrepresented voices and stories in the UK. Their credits include _Boiling Point_  (2021) and its upcoming TV series for the BBC. They are currently filming _A Thousand Blows_ with Disney+.

British actor **Stephen Odubola** is probably best known for his leading role as Timmy in Paramount Pictures’ acclaimed crime drama _Blue Story_ opposite Micheal Ward and Sean Sagar, written and directed by Rapman. The film centres around a gang war that dooms the lifelong bond of south London friends and garnered exceptional reviews for the ‘elegant grit and volatile vibe’ it depicted of a world ruled by crazed-leader-of-the-pack bravado and vengeance. Other notable film and television credits include a leading role as Marcus Wainwright in Ascendant Films’ _A Violent Man_ alongside Jason Flemyng; Netflix’s _The Sandman_ with Tom Sturridge; SKY Studios’ _Fields_ with Malcolm Kamulete and at this year’s London Film Festival will be seen in feature film _Gassed Up_.

**Rhianna Dhillon**  **(chair)** has been a film critic for 12 years, beginning her career at BBC Radio 1 and 1Xtra as their in-house film critic. Now a film and TV critic on BBC 6Music’s Breakfast Show with Lauren Laverne, Rhianna is also the BBC 5Live film reviewer and hosts the PodPod Podcast. Rhianna moderates events and Q&As for BAFTA, Disney, the BFI and others.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTczMjk5MTA0Nl19
-->