


<![endif]-->

Disney’s _Beauty and the Beast_ is a tale of transformation, narrated in the overtly stylised fashion of Broadway. Accounts of the film’s production tend to foreground not directors Kirk Wise and Gary Trousdale, but animator Glen Keane, who supervised the reforming Beast, and lyricist Howard Ashman, who directed the singers from his sickbed as he lay dying from AIDS. The musician Alan Menken deserves equal credit, but his lush style, unlike Ashman’s pawky lyrics, was sadly institutionalised in subsequent Disney films_._

Following 1989’s _The Little Mermaid_ (everyone seems to forget about  
_The Rescuers Down Under_ in 1990), _Beauty and the Beast_ cemented Disney’s ‘return’ as an animation studio. Until _Up_ and _Avatar_ in 2009, it was the only animated feature nominated for a Best Picture Oscar, losing to _The Silence of the Lambs_ in 1991_._ For sceptics, though, the new Disney was already brand-Disney. _Beauty and the Beast_ had been meant to be directed by London animators Richard and Jill Purdum (whose studio employed, among others, a young Sylvain Chomet, director of _Belleville Rendez-vous_). The Purdums wanted a non-musical, reportedly ‘dark’ film, ‘something not in the Disney mould,’ according to producer Don Hahn. They were let go, and Ashman and Menken brought aboard to repeat their musical success from _The Little Mermaid._

Yet for all this creative rigidity, _Beauty and the Beast’_s first screening was in a uniquely metamorphic state at the 1991 New York Film Festival. This ‘Work in Progress’ (included on the DVD) interleaves pieces of finished animation with moving pencil sketches, static concept art and rough blockings, with the liquid mystery of Cocteau’s _La Belle et la Bête_. In the giant ballroom, the titular dancers (hand-animated in the finished scene by James Baxter) are wire frames moving in staccato, clockwork increments against the monochrome geometries of early CGI. The Beast – shown mostly in naked pencil tests – is a mass of snarling lines, dissolving into ensouled shades and scribbles, like _Forbidden Planet_’s Id monster_._

The finished film lacks these dimensions, but it has a freshness and energy palpable in Belle’s first swinging steps as she walks ‘towards’ camera with the presence of Julie Andrews, cuing her small provincial town to wake up and sing. Her song, ‘Belle,’ is the radiant flipside to Menken and Ashman’s tragicomic ‘Skid Row’ in the musical _The Little Shop of Horrors_ nine years before. Even the villainous Gaston, a preening Adonis, is first seen uplifting the chorus with his chauvinist baritone.

Some of the animated crowd shots are trite and mechanical by classic Disney standards, especially in the finales to ‘Belle’ and ‘Gaston,’ but they’re easily outweighed by the flair of a jaunty, stand-shuffling French candlestick introducing the next number (‘The dining room proudly presents… your dinner!’), or by the ballroom’s swirling camerawork. This same flair makes Belle’s overstated feistiness continually charming, now that its counter-stereotype has been thoroughly outmoded by the post-Disney heroines of _Belleville Rendez-vous, Persepolis_ and _Sita Sings the Blues._

Back in the day, academics argued if _Beauty and the Beast_ might be feminist (the man must reform to be fit for the woman; the woman’s gaze is balanced against the man’s in the ‘Something There’ duet) or not (it’s still a fairy-tale marriage plot, and Belle happily loses herself against the Beast’s chest or paw).  Perhaps inadvertently, there’s some looking-glass recursion about Belle’s place in the story. We and the Beast know Belle is the answer to his predicament (‘Who could ever learn to love a Beast?’). But the story is told _through_ Belle, a wide-eyed adventuress and dreamer who might have almost conjured up the Beast, castle and all. These entwined framings add piquancy to the moment of (ostensible) free will when the Beast spurns their predestined story and frees Belle, sacrificing himself for love of her.

The critic Marina Warner wrote of Keane’s Beast as ‘male desire incarnate; he swells, he towers, he inflates, he tumesces.’ But it’s a displaced, sublimated desire beside Cocteau’s literally smouldering Beast, or the throbbing cartoon Wolf of Tex Avery’s _Red Hot Riding Hood._ Disney’s Beast hates and fears his monstrous body, like the incontinently ballooning boy in _Akira._ When he doesn’t get his way, his roars give way to confused petulance in a snappy scene when he argues through Belle’s door. (Keane based the Beast’s comedic moments on Jackie Gleason in _The Honeymooners._) Then he’s coaxed into bathing, table manners and dance steps. In one sight gag, he’s made up like the Cowardly Lion, though that’s  the limit. His manly honour is restored in a stormy rooftop battle, causing his saintly death and transfiguration in a crescendo of arched limbs and billowing linework. His human form is striking in the first reveal, until he speaks.

Keane drew another muscled Disney hero in 1999’s _Tarzan_, but that character’s physique outstripped his personality. CGI films have relegated monsters to comic or cuddly duties, while _Shrek_ tried revising _Beauty and the Beast_ by turning a beautiful princess into a homely ogress. Hayao Miyazaki’s _Howl’s Moving Castle_ contrasted its hero’s monstrous transformations with a girl’s empowering human changes, from young to old and all points between.  
**Andrew Osmond, _100 Animated Feature Films_ (BFI/Palgrave Macmillan, 2010) Reproduced by kind permission of Bloomsbury Publishing. ©Andrew Osmond**  

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEzNzkzMzM2NTRdfQ==
-->