
<![endif]-->

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

For decades, American cinema sought a populist genre to replace the western as a form in which good and evil could be embodied in white hats and black hats, and issues of national identity, absolute morality and masculine self-image could be assessed in the context of audience-pleasing action and excitement. In 1977 _Star Wars_ provided the answer; the western proper faded away and all the cowboys climbed into spaceships and swapped their guns for lightsabers. To the present day, the dominant box-office form of mainstream cinema is the science-fiction-and-fantasy-tinged comic-book spectacular. But, in a brief window, it seemed that cops would trump cowboys.

When actor-director Jack Webb’s _Dragnet_ – a show that dramatised authentic LAPD cases, with ‘names changed to protect the innocent’ – migrated from radio to television in 1951, a brand of badge-wielding urban law and order became familiar and unquestioned in the media. For more than 20 years, cop heroes dominated small and big screens, in all varieties of toughness, intellect and rigidity; often, the handover from western to policier was made explicit, as in _Coogan’s Bluff_ and _Fort Apache, the Bronx_. In the movies, Don Siegel offered Richard Widmark as Madigan and Clint Eastwood as Coogan and Dirty Harry; Gene Hackman’s Popeye Doyle propelled  
_The French Connection_ to Oscar success; and cop-turned-author Joseph Wambaugh’s novels gave rise to _The New Centurions_, _The Choirboys_ and _The Onion Field_. On television, procedurals such as _The Streets of San Francisco_ and _Police Story_ ran alongside personality-led gimmick shows including _Columbo_, _McCloud_ (a riff on _Coogan’s Bluff_) and _McMillan & Wife_, before evolving into ensemble dramas like _Hill Street Blues_ and _Homicide Life on the Street_. The mismatched cop partnership (in which teams of mixed sexes, races and legal approaches bond to become buddies) became a thing with _Freebie and the Bean_ in the movies and _Starsky & Hutch_ on TV, then mutated into freakier efforts like _Partners_ (gay and straight), _Lethal Weapon_ (sane and crazy), _Dead Heat_ (dead and alive) and _The Breed_ (vampire and human). Cops even crossed over into science fiction via _RoboCop_ and _Alien Nation_.

Throughout, the ideal was Webb’s Sergeant Joe Friday: upright, deadpan, inflexible, efficient, remote, a stickler for the law. Mr Spock with a badge and gun, Friday is entirely free from the warmth that marked his UK counterpart Sergeant George Dixon of Dock Green (Jack Warner) or the sitcom sheriff of _The Andy Griffith Show_. An early idol of James Ellroy, who has mutated the cop form in his entire output (which includes the films _Cop_, _LA Confidential_ and _Rampart_), Webb’s Friday is interesting only insofar as the actor-auteur’s contempt for law-breakers and their associates seems to take in the entire world and render the hero some sort of avenging monster who looks at every perp and witness and suspect with gunsight eyes and should quite rightly terrify everyone who might cross his path.

Then came Frank Serpico. An Italian-American who joined the NYPD as a patrolman in 1959, Serpico raised the issue of endemic corruption in various departments, inspiring Mayor John V. Lindsay to convene the Knapp Commission into police malfeasance. In 1971, the whistleblower was shot in the face by a drug dealer – it was alleged that other officers had failed to support him during a raid and, in effect, set him up for execution. He survived, and Peter Maas’s biography _Serpico_ became a bestseller, eventually winding up with producer Martin Bregman and mogul Dino De Laurentiis. The property was briefly considered as a Robert Redford-Paul Newman vehicle (Newman would have played Serpico’s politically connected lawyer friend David Durk, who is fictionalised as cop Bob Blair, played by Tony Roberts, in the film) before Bregman signed Al Pacino, fresh from _The Godfather_, to star, and John G. Avildsen, fresh from _Joe_, to direct. In the event Avildsen – later to make _Rocky_ – left the project and Sidney Lumet took over.

Ironically, Pacino’s Serpico – for all his shaggy, hippie looks – could stand beside Joe Friday or Harry Callahan in superhuman rectitude. An eager beaver who hares off on his own to crack cases, even if it makes colleagues look bad, Serpico is uncomfortable with free lunches and won’t take a penny of the graft that his colleagues expect as a regular perk of the job. Friday would approve. It’s just that the movie depicts every other cop as crooked, so the overall portrait of the police is antithetical to the vision of _Dragnet_. By 1973, after the divisions of the late 1960s, plenty of average Americans were disillusioned by the behaviour of uniformed officers during civil-rights marches or Vietnam protests. A 1967 revival of _Dragnet_, in which Friday busts hippies, protesters and long-haired troublemakers, was taken as camp even by viewers who had grown up with the earlier incarnation of the show. Later, in _The Big Easy_ or _The_ _Shield_, there would be nuanced depictions of corrupt cops who were nevertheless good police, but in _Serpico_ the official villains are unredeemable. Lumet casts great faces – the pockmarked detective who holds back while Serpico has his arm trapped in a door is a young, unbilled F. Murray Abraham – and the film offers an array of shifty, glad-handing, bullying, sinister or threatening officers.

Though _Serpico_ is drawn from Maas’s non-fiction book, the film, scripted by Waldo Salt and Norman Wexler, plays loose with the timing. Events take place over a decade, as shown by the transformation of the clean-shaven, short-haired rookie patrolman in neat uniform into a bearded, long-haired, countercultural shambler, but there’s no sense of the great shifts in greater society in the 1960s. Frankly, all of _Serpico_ seems to take place in an endless 1973, and the fashions, slang, drugs, music (an unusual score from Mikis Theodorakis) and street vibe are all definitely 70s rather than 60s; when the film gave rise to a short-lived spinoff TV series (anything about a cop could get a season in the 70s) with David Birney, Serpico’s anti-corruption campaign was downplayed and stories focused on his undercover drop-out cop cases. Aside from an amusing ‘happening’ scene in which Serpico freaks out a succession of with-it caricatures when they find out what he does for a living, the drama is all inside the police department rather than in the relationship between cops and civilians. As the _MAD_ magazine parody of the film (‘Serpicool’) pointed out, the hero seemed to be the only person in New York who didn’t know cops were on the take.

It’s startling to revisit _Serpico_, with the electric and yet unmannered lead performance of Pacino and the mosaic narrative approach of Lumet, and realise how tough the movie is on its lead character. Even in 1973, the temptation of ‘liberal Hollywood’ was to make cardboard heroes out of those struggling against endemic evil – this would, presumably, have been what a Robert Redford Serpico might have looked like. But Pacino and Lumet show that one of the sacrifices Serpico makes in his crusade is his own likeability. Unable to partake in the camaraderie of cop partnerships because of his refusal to accept graft, Serpico is also removed from his ethnic family support group by his decision to live where he works rather than in his old neighbourhood. In the course of the film he has one trivial affair, with model-gorgeous Leslie Lane (Cornelia Sharpe), who calmly leaves him to marry someone else. A more serious relationship, with next-door neighbour Laurie (Barbara Eda-Young), collapses as he takes out on her the frustrations of yet another failed attempt to tell the truth. Even his steadfast friend Blair, who bonds with him in a funny moment as a roomful of cops have to sample marijuana, is abused and rejected after his connection to the mayor fails to come through.

There’s an _Enemy of the People_ aspect to Serpico’s story. Pacino digs deep to hint that his persistence has as much to do with bloody-mindedness and hurt pride as altruism and integrity. In the era of Nixon and Watergate, paranoia was a dominant mode of American cinema, and _Serpico_ throbs with the dangers of every situation: undercover in plain clothes that make him look like the enemy, Serpico has to dodge bullets fired by a fellow officer while he’s making an arrest; called to an informal meeting of his colleagues in the park, he finds himself in the middle of a circle of menacing, accusing officers who feel that a cop who isn’t corrupt paradoxically can’t be trusted. Attempts to take his story to superiors, internal affairs, the mayor’s office or the media are all thwarted, and even his ultimate victory just puts a target on his back. At the end, Serpico is seen alone but for his sole companion, an enormous and equally shaggy sheepdog, slumped on the docks as a caption reveals that the real-life Serpico now lives quietly in Switzerland, perhaps to avoid yet another ‘accidental shooting’.  
**Kim Newman, _Sight and Sound_, March 2014**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNTMyMjk5NDA5XX0=
-->