


<![endif]-->

The collaboration between Martin Scorsese and Thelma Schoonmaker is the stuff of cinematic legend – not so very unlike that between Powell and Pressburger. It was Scorsese who introduced Schoonmaker to her husband Michael Powell, and she soon joined Scorsese as he continued to rehabilitate the critical reputation of the films made by Powell and Pressburger. Schoonmaker helped her husband edit his autobiography and to get it published. Since Powell’s death in 1990 she has worked tirelessly with Scorsese’s Film Foundation to help restore the films of Powell and Pressburger and most recently Powell’s own _Peeping Tom_. Schoonmaker’s genius as an editor and her devotion to the art of cinema saw her awarded with a BFI Fellowship in 1997, our highest honour, and it is with the greatest pleasure that we celebrate her achievements and the work of many decades, together.

bfi.org.uk

The films of Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger have a shimmering, magical quality that distinguishes them from all others. The great run of films this pair made together as ‘The Archers’ began in the midst of World War II and continued through the austerity years, but they are romantic, musical, lustrous and bewitchingly supernatural – as well as sincerely internationalist. There’s no better guide to them than Thelma Schoonmaker. The triple Oscar-winning editor was married to Powell from 1984 until his death in 1990. Since then she has been the custodian of his legacy, overseeing projects including his posthumous memoir, the restorations of his films and an English Heritage Blue Plaque at the Archers’ former offices in London. Her creative partner Martin Scorsese (she has edited all his fiction features since 1980) is likewise a tireless champion of Powell and Pressburger’s films. Schoonmaker describes his devotion to preserving their legacy as ‘unstoppable’.

I spoke to Schoonmaker in September, when she was deep in preparation for the release of _Killers of the Flower Moon_, but seemingly still on a high from Il Cinema Ritrovato in Bologna in June, which hosted a retrospective of Powell’s early films. ‘It was so wonderful to screen the films with fresh audiences, particularly because that audience is so young there, and see that people were enjoying the films tremendously. I think Michael would’ve enjoyed that. Wim Wenders was sitting next to me laughing and [Cannes film festival director] Thierry Frémaux also.’ Many of these early films, made under the British ‘quota quickies’ system, meaning low budgets and short schedules, have been remastered and will screen as part of a major BFI season. For all their cut corners, there’s a tangible sense of Powell’s talent in the verve and variety of these early films. Not for nothing did the _Observer_ critic C.A. Lejeune write in 1931 that Powell’s work ‘shows what a good movie brain can do within the strictest limits of economy’.

It was as a teenager, shortly after her family moved from the Caribbean to New York, that Schoonmaker saw her first Powell film. It was _The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp_ (1943) on TV. Of course, she never dreamed she would marry the man who made this romantic film. Her ambition was a career as a diplomat, but she swiftly learned her political views were too liberal: ‘They said, “What would you do if you were in a cocktail party at the embassy in South Africa, and somebody asked you what you thought about apartheid?” I said,  
“I would say it’s terrible. It has to stop.” And they said, “You can’t do that until the government… decides they want to say that.” Well, that got me bounced.’ She took a summer course in filmmaking, where she met Scorsese. She recut his film _What’s a Nice Girl like You Doing in a Place like This?_ (1963), which had been mangled by a negative cutter, and they became friends, and collaborators. Scorsese introduced Schoonmaker to Powell when they were editing _Raging Bull_ in 1979; shortly afterwards they moved in together, and five years later they were married. ‘I think I’m the luckiest person in the world,’ says Schoonmaker. ‘I would never have met Scorsese except for the fact that somebody miscut his negative. And I would never have met Michael if I hadn’t been working for Scorsese. I’ve had so many lucky breaks.’

Living with Powell, Schoonmaker saw a side of the director others didn’t. ‘He has a reputation for being tough on actors, but that was because when he was making films, it was a religion, he says. And if someone came on that set who didn’t have that same feeling and didn’t perform properly, he could be quite tough, from what I understand. I never saw that, never in the ten years I lived with him.’ Schoonmaker recalls an indefatigable, endlessly imaginative man who refused to let the setbacks of his later career stifle his creative energy. ‘He made every second of every day count. I’ve never been around anyone like that since,’ she says. ‘He didn’t waste a moment of any day. It was a joy to live with him because he was so full of life and never gave up.’  
**Thelma Schoonmaker interviewed by Pamela Hutchinson, _Sight and Sound_, November 2023**  
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTIxMjE1NTc1M119
-->