
_+ Q&A with Candice Carty-Williams, Déja J Bowens, Malcolm Kamulete,  Ray BLK and John Ogunmuyiwa_

_Champion_ is the first TV project from Candice Carty-Williams, author of the _Sunday Times_ bestselling novels _Queenie_ and _People Person_.

Rap sensation Bosco Champion is home from prison, and ready to dominate the music industry once more. But when his dutiful younger sister Vita’s own talent is discovered by Bosco’s rival, she steps out of her brother’s shadow to become a performer in her own right, setting the Champion siblings against one another and tearing apart the whole family in the process.

A love letter to Black British music set in south London, _Champion_ is a celebration of a sound that has long been the beating heart of our culture. Featuring original music written and produced by some of the leading musicians this country has to offer including Ray BLK, Ghetts and more.

Sibling rivalry never sounded so epic.

**About the panel**

**Candice Carty-Williams**  
Candice Carty-Williams was born in south London in 1989. She is a novelist, now showrunner, culture writer, and author of Book of the Year Award winning and _Sunday Times_ bestselling _Queenie_, as well as the young adult novella _Empress and Aniya_, _and_ the _Sunday Times_ bestselling _People Person_.  In 2016, Candice created and launched the _Guardian_ and 4th Estate Short Story Prize for underrepresented writers, the first inclusive initiative of its kind in book publishing. _Champion_ is Candice’s first project for TV, and _Queenie_ is currently being adapted for Channel 4 and Disney, with Candice showrunning.

**Déja J Bowens**  
Having recently left drama school, she is about to make her on screen debut in the hugely anticipated BBC drama  _Champion_.** Déja takes on the co-lead as Vita in the eight part series. Prior to this, Déja was on stage at the Donmar Warehouse in _Marys Seacole_.

**Malcolm Kamulete**

British rising star Malcolm Kamulete is probably best known for his role as Ra’Nell in Netflix’s much-loved thriller drama series _Top_ _Boy_. Malcolm will next be seen starring as Bosco Champion in BBC’s _Champion_ by _Queenie_ author Candice Carty-Williams. He also starred alongside Nicholas Pinnock in critically acclaimed short film _Things I Never Told My Father_, written and produced by Letitia Wright and was winner of ‘Best International’ at the New York Shorts International Film Festival. He can also be seen as Rambo in Sky Studio’s _Fields_ and in Paramount’s _Ill Manors_ with Riz Ahmed and Ed Skrein.  
Malcolm is a talented rapper and has just been listed as one of _The_ _Face_’s ‘stars to watch’.

**Ray BLK**

Ray BLK, short for Building, Living, Knowing, is a Nigerian-born singer, songwriter, and actress and entrepreneur from South London. Her debut mixtape, ‘Havisham’ (2015), drew inspiration from Charles Dickens’ _Great_ _Expectations_, telling a story of heartbreak and empowerment, introducing her to the British audience.

In a remarkable achievement, Ray became the first and only unsigned artist to win BBC’s Sound of Music award. Her debut EP, _Durt_ (2016) featured SG Lewis, Wretch 32, and her breakthrough hit ‘My Hood’ featuring Stormzy. She followed it up with _Empress_, a project full of self-love anthems, including her critically acclaimed hit ‘Run Run’ tackling youth violence. Her uncompromising lyricism and vulnerability took centre stage in her highly anticipated debut album, _Access_ _Denied_ (2021) earning Ray a No 1 album on the R&B Chart & critical acclaim from _The Guardian_, _NME_ and _The Evening Standard_. She’s been featured in the Forbes 30 under 30, toured with Nicki Minaj, along with having her own sold out US and UK tours under her belt. Her previous collaborations also include the likes of Gorillaz, Wyclef Jean and Beenie Man, but her creative pursuits extend beyond music and acting. Ray has also made a splash in the beauty industry. In 2021, Ray successfully launched her own nail brand, ‘Blklisted,’ adding another dimension to her creative endeavours.

Ray is set to make her acting debut in BBC’s series _Champion_ by Candice Carty-Williams, where she takes on the role of ‘Honey’ while also serving as Music Executive alongside Ghetts. She has recorded the new single ‘My Girl’ which features on the official soundtrack.

**John Ogunmuyiwa**

An award-winning, Nigerian-born, London-bred filmmaker whose work draws upon a constant questioning of what it means to be normal. Working out ideas, what ifs, isn’t it weirds and wouldn’t it be cools through the medium of film. Using daily observations as a base, he tends to bring a tinge of surrealism/ magic into his work where he can. All with the aim of telling untold stories from a different perspective.

<![endif]-->

**CHAMPION (EPISODE 1)**

_Writer & Executive Producer:  
_Candice Carty-Williams

_Director:_ John Ogunmuyiwa

_Executive Producers:_ Bryan Elsley,  
Charlie Pattinson, Dave Evans, Willow Grylls, Imogen O’Sullivan, Danielle Scott-Haughton

_Producer:_ Joy Gharoro-Akpojotor

_Casting Director:_ Daniel Edwards

_Director of Photography:_ Christopher Sabogal

_Production Designer:_ Gini Godwin

_Costume Designer:_ Cynthia Lawrence-John

_Hair & Make-Up Designer:_ Marcia Blackwood

_Music Executives:_ Ray BLK,  
Justin Clarke aka Ghetts

_Music Supervisor:_ Catherine Grieves

_Music Advisor:_ Hattie Collins

_Cast:_

Déja J Bowens _(Vita)_

Malcolm Kamulete _(Bosco)_

Nadine Marshall _(Aria)_

Ray Fearon _(Beres)_

Ray BLK _(Honey)_

Kerim Hassan _(Memet)_

Adeyinka Akinrinade _(Chantelle)_

Tom Forbes _(Mark)_

Genesis Lynea _(Tayo)_

Jo Martin _(Dawn)_

Olivia-Rose Colliard _(Milan)_

Karl Collins _(Lennox)_

Rachel Adedeji _(Yemi)_

Corey Weekes _(Bulla)_

Francis Lovehall _(Laurent)_

Fergus Rees _(Philip)_

Levi Babin _(young Bosco)_

Saskia Holness _(young Vita)_

Remi Burgz _(as herself)_

Faye Campbell _(record label assistant)_

BBC 2023

45 mins
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTk4NzQ3OTQzNl19
-->