---
layout: post
title: Toy Story 2
published: true
date: 2023-07-23
readtime: true
categories: ['MAKING MAGIC<BR>100 YEARS OF DISNEY']
tags: [Comedy, Adventure, Animation, Children]
metadata: 'USA 1999, 92 mins<br> Director: John Lasseter'
pdf: '2023-07-23-toy-story-2.pdf'
---

Although a triumph of cutting-edge technology, demonstrating fully the possibilities of computer animation, _Toy Story_ has become such a much-loved film because of its profound, almost old-fashioned humanity. Woody, Buzz and the toy gang, down to the merest walk-on sight gag, are alive in the way all great cartoon creatures are alive (in no small part thanks to canny voice casting that exactly matches the character design). Like this sequel, the first film has an extremely sophisticated, surprisingly melancholy understanding of the importance, resonance and tragically brief shelf-life of the average plaything.

The follow-up may be inevitably less fresh and misses the freakish presence of Sid’s mutant toys (the three-eyed grabmachine aliens from the first film, however, have a nice cameo), but it makes a few minor, effective upgrades. Randy Newman’s musical numbers, for example, are integrated so as to serve the plot points. _Toy Story 2_ focuses even more tightly than the first film on the plight of creatures who are only ‘alive’ so long as they can retain the attention of their quixotic owners. Their in-built obsolescence is ultimately as poignant as the tiny lifespans of the _Blade Runner_ replicants.

So while the plot sets up Woody’s rescue from the loathsome Al, affording the opportunity for all manner of extravagant action scenes – a roadcrossing set-piece, with the toys hiding under traffic cones and achieving their end while causing human-level chaos they don’t notice, and a splendid, protracted peril ride through the airport at the finale – the script takes care to show the downside of toy life. Jessie, for instance, sings about the loss of her owner’s love, signified by the junking of cowgirl ephemera in favour of make-up and pop records. The toy villain, one of those sad but valuable items who remains pristine in his original 50s box, yearns for a life in a museum, but Woody and the film finally recognise that toys have no real value, no life, unless they are played with.

Of course, any film with this message that comes (albeit at one remove) from Walt Disney and with an attendant merchandising blitz, has to cope with an ironic bite. Those in the know, especially exasperated parents, will love the cynical gags about the toy business: Rex the dinosaur discovers a Buzz Lightyear video game can’t be won without the purchase of a tie-in manual; in the store Tour Guide Barbie explains an aisle-load of Buzz figures by noting that ‘in 1995, shortsighted retailers understocked.’ Barbie’s licensees refused to allow her to appear in the original, which means she comes in for some hilarious joshing here and generally comes off as an airhead next to the spunkier Bo Peep and Jessie.

Al, the discount-toy entrepreneur, comes in for a lot of criticism, but the film takes advantage of his obsessions to fill in the backgrounds of its own inventions. Video games and the _Star Wars_ franchise are parodied as the film delves into the relationship between Buzz and Zurg, while it also perfectly evokes the ramshackle charm represented by _Howdy Doody_ in the US and _Muffin the Mule_ here – of vintage 50s puppet television, with an attendant panoply of lunch-boxes, toy gramophones, cereal promotions (‘Cowboy Crunchies’) and snake-in-the-boot jack-in-the-boxes. Like _The Iron Giant_, the film revisits the 50s for much of its inspiration, rediscovering in the era the dawn of marketing. But a full measure of _Toy Story 2_’s success can be gauged by its undeniable appeal for children who have never seen a Western television show or played with a cowboy toy.  
**Kim Newman, _Sight and Sound_, March 2000**

Against the usual run of things, _Toy Story 2_ is generally considered even better than the first; audiences have seemed to agree with _Variety_ magazine’s judgement: ‘This sequel is more than equal.’

The _Toy Story_ story began in 1991 when Pixar founder John Lasseter pitched to Disney the idea of something which had never been done before: a full-length movie animated by CGI (computer-generated imagery). The core of his narrative idea was a single image: a toy left behind at a motorway rest-stop, its owner unwittingly leaving without it. Four years later this had evolved into the now-familiar tale of rival toys, Buzz and Woody, vying for the affections of their owner.

The follow-up likewise began with one single image in Lasseter’s mind: ‘I love toys. My toys are collectibles, and I keep them in my office. When my kids come to visit me at work and play with my toys, I just go nuts, I’m so anxiety-ridden. Then I started thinking to myself: because a toy is old, expensive and collectible, it’s meant to sit on a shelf and never be played with again – but what kind of life is that for a toy? What if Woody is a rare collectible and is found by a toy collector?’

Ironically this follow-up was not originally intended to be seen in cinemas, but was destined for a straight-to-video release. Only when Disney executives saw a rough cut in October 1997 did they reverse their low expectations and agree to spend up to $100 million turning it into a feature and giving it heavy promotional support.

This change of status involved pumping up the running time from an hour to 75 minutes, adding new characters and rewriting the story. Major new characters were inserted even at this late stage: one was Wheezy, a cast-off squeezy penguin who’s lost his squeak; another was The Cleaner, a toy restorer who gives Woody a spit-and-polish; a third is Buster, a dog.

In addition to these, there’s a new leading female character, Jessie, the cowgirl from Woody’s 1950s TV series. She was created partly in response to the criticism that in _Toy Story_ the only significant female character, Bo-Peep, is insipid and passive. Lasseter says: ‘When we started developing the sequel, there was a desire to have stronger female characters. We’re very proud of Jessie. On the one hand she’s gregarious and energetic, but on the other there’s a deep emotional quality to her so that, even though there’s not a lot of animation going on, there’s some really sweet acting.’

On the question of whether his films are Disney films, Lasseter’s response is: ‘We make movies for ourselves, the kind of movies that we want to see. And the movies I am most affected by are the ones that make me laugh hysterically, but also move me. I’m not ashamed to cry in movies. It’s a classic Disney tradition and we’ve adapted it to this new medium.’  
**Terry Staples**  
<br>

**TIN TOY**  
_Director:_ John Lasseter  
USA 1988  
5 mins  

**KNICK KNACK**  
_Director:_ John Lasseter  
USA 1989  
4 mins  

**TOY STORY 2**  
_Director_: John Lasseter  
_Co-directors_: Lee Unkrich, Ash Brannon  
_©_: Inc. Disney Enterprises, Pixar Animation Studios  
_Presented by_: Walt Disney Pictures  
_Executive Producer_: Sarah Mcarthur  
_Executive Producer_: Steven Jobs [uncredited]  
_Producers_: Helene Plotkin, Karen Robert Jackson  
_Production Manager_: Graham Walters  
_Director of Computer Operations_: Greg Brandeau  
_Post-production Supervisor_: Paul Cichocki  
_Casting_: Ruth Lambert, Mary Hidalgo  
_Screenplay_: Andrew Stanton, Rita Hsiao, Doug Chamberlin, Chris Webb  
_Original Story_: John Lasseter, Pete Docter, Ash Brannon, Andrew Stanton  
_Story Supervisors_: Dan Jeup, Joe Ranft  
_Story Artists_: Jim Capobianco, David Fulp, Matthew Luhn, Ken Mitchroney, Max Brace, Jill Culton, Rob Gibbs, Jason Katz, Bud Luckey, Ricky Nierva, Sanjay Patel, Bob Peterson, Jeff Pidgeon, Jan Pinkava, Bobby Podesta, Nathan Stanton, Mark A. Walsh  
_Story Department Managers_: Renee Jensen, Susan E. Levin  
_Director of Photography_: Sharon Calahan  
_Camera Department Manager_: Perrin Cutting  
_Camera Supervisor_: Louis Rivera  
_Lighting Supervisor_: Jean-Claude Kalache  
_Modelling Supervisor_: Eben Ostby  
_Supervising Animator_: Glenn McQueen  
_Directing Animator_: Kyle Balda, Dylan Brown  
_Animation Department Co-ordinator_: David Orecklin  
_Animation Managers_: Jenny Head, Kori Rae  
_Fix Animator_: Paul Mendoza, Andrea Schultz  
_Rendering Supervisor_: Don Schreiter  
_Effects Department Manager_: Kelly T. Peters  
_Layout Supervisors_: Rikki Cleland-Hura, Ewan Johnson  
_Senior Layout Artist_: Craig Good  
_Editors_: Edie Bleiman, David Ian Salter, Lee Unkrich  
_Second Editor_: Robert Grahamjones  
_Additional Editing_: James Austin Stewart, Ken Schretzmann, Richard Halsey, Mildred Iatrou  
_Production Designer_: William Cone, Jim Pearson  
_Shading Supervisor_: Brad West  
_Art Director - Shading_: Bryn Imagire  
_Set Dressing Supervisor_: David Eisenmann  
_Title Design_: Susan Bradley  
_Optical Titles_: Buena Vista Imaging  
_Music_: Randy Newman  
_Orchestrations_: Jonathan Sacks, Ira Hearshen, Randy Newman  
_Additional Arrangements_: Bruno Coon  
_Sound Design_: Gary Rydstrom  
_Sound Supervisors_: Gary Rydstrom, Tom Myers  
_Additional Dialogue Recording_: Bob Baron, Bill Higley, John Mcgleenan, Brian Reed  
_Re-recording Mixers_: Gary Rydstrom,
Gary Summers  
_Original Dialogue Mixer_: Doc Kane  
_Re-recordist_: Ronald G. Roumas  
_Supervising Sound Editor_: Michael Silvers  
_Sound Effects Editors_: Teresa Eckton,
Shannon Mills  

**Voice cast**  
Tom Hanks _(Woody)_  
Tim Allen _(Buzz Lightyear)_  
Joan Cusack _(Jessie)_  
Kelsey Grammer _(Stinky Pete the Prospector)_  
Don Rickles _(Mr Potato Head)_  
Jim Varney _(Slinky Dog)_  
Wallace Shawn _(Rex)_  
John Ratzenberger _(Hamm)_  
Annie Potts _(Bo Peep)_  
Wayne Knight _(Al McWhiggin)_  
John Morris _(Andy)_  
Laurie Metcalf _(Andy’s mom)_  
Estelle Harris _(Mrs Potato Head)_  
R. Lee Ermey _(Sarge)_  
Jodi Benson _(Barbie)_  
Jonathan Harris _(The Cleaner)_  
Joe Ranft _(Wheezy)_  
Andrew Stanton _(Emperor Zurg)_  
Jeff Pidgeon _(aliens)_  
Jack Angel, Bob Bergen, Mary Kay Bergman, Sheryl Bernstein, Rodger Bumpass, Corey Burton, Rachel Davey, Debi Derryberry, Jessica Evans,  
Bill Farmer, Pat Fraley, Jess Harnell, John Lasseter, Nicolette Little, Sherry Lynn, Mickie McGowan, Jeff Pidgeon, Phil Proctor, Jan Rabson, Carly Schroeder, Madylin Sweeten, Hannah Unkrich, Lee Unkrich _(additional voices)_  
Andi Peters _(additional voice of baggage handler)_  

USA 1999  
92 mins
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTIzNTM4MzU0OF19
-->