
Pete Docter, director of Pixar’s new hit _Up_, describes his creative process in watery terms: ‘It’s as though we’re in a pool splashing around, looking for things. It’s being in it, just feeling – and then stopping and analysing.’

This process led to some striking visual conceits in _Up_, which opens in cinemas in both 2D and 3D formats. It’s the story of Carl, a curmudgeonly widower who attaches his house to thousands of balloons and flies away. At one point, he’s shown grimly pulling the floating house on a rope through the dreamlike landscape of the table-top mountains of South America – an image reminiscent of Werner Herzog’s _Fitzcarraldo_.

Carl’s wife Ellie, who dies at the start of the film, is evoked through empty spaces such as a vacant armchair. ‘Ellie is really the drive through the whole film,’ says Docter. ‘Without the audience feeling something about Carl and Ellie’s relationship, and Carl’s need to fill it, I think you’d lose interest.’

Producer Jonas Rivera concurs, describing _Up_’s tear-jerking opening as the launch pad for the fantastical adventures that follow. ‘We need to set the stakes of the film, so you’ll go with us. We’re asking the audience to take a pretty big leap in terms of Carl’s house, the dogs [which talk] and the planes [piloted by the talking dogs]. We felt that showing Carl and Ellie’s married life was important in allowing all that to happen.’

Both _Up_ and [the same year’s] _Coraline_ use 3D much as 1939’s _The Wizard of Oz_ used Technicolor: to contrast a flat, mundane world with wide-open, fantastic vistas. Yet _Up_ ultimately comes to the same conclusion as _Oz_: that happiness resides in the real world, not in flights of fancy.

Some reviewers have objected to the grown-up content in Pixar’s films, saying that it would baffle younger viewers – how do children respond to the ‘married life’ sequence, for example? ‘For most, it seems to go over their heads a little bit,’ says Rivera. ‘None of them seem too crushed. We get more responses about the dogs, or a giant bird hurting its leg… things that frighten a kid.’

Docter and Rivera point out that _Up_’s very first scenes show Carl and Ellie as children, engaging the sympathies of youngsters that way. (Another child, a chubby boy scout, turns up to accompany Carl in the main story.) The young Ellie was voiced by Docter’s daughter Elie, who also made the drawings in Ellie’s handmade ‘Adventure Book’, which plays a crucial role in the film.

Pixar’s films have been criticised for featuring few female characters. Did Docter ever consider making Ellie the protagonist instead of Carl? ‘We did consider it,’ he says. ‘But we developed this grouchy character. Maybe I’m sexist, but it didn’t appeal as an old woman who would slam the door in people’s faces.’ But they have worked on writing more female characters, he points out; and Pixar’s first film by a woman director, Brenda Chapman’s _Bear and the Bow_, is scheduled for 2011.

Pixar’s recent experiments _WALL-E_ and _Up_ have been critical and commercial hits, with _Up_’s US box office second only to _Finding Nemo_’s for an animated film. But while Pixar continues the tradition of Disney-derived cartoon caricature (_Up_’s vision of South America has a painterly, graphic design, inspired by the Disney artist Mary Blair), James Cameron’s _Avatar_ and Spielberg’s _The Adventures of Tintin: The Secret of the Unicorn_ are about to usher in a new generation of motion-captured animation technology. Will Pixar have to adapt?

‘It’s exciting when there’s something you can do now that you couldn’t do before,’ says Rivera. ‘If we could see a Tintin that looks like something we’ve never seen before, and still has the appeal of Tintin, then I’ll pay and go. As an audience, I can’t wait… But I still love traditional animation so much that I want to keep the pendulum aiming that way.’  
**Andrew Osmond, _Sight and Sound_, November 2009**

_Up_ opens with a sepia-hued, flickering Movietone newsreel trumpeting the exploits of fictional 1930s aeronautical explorer Charles Muntz. The image pans back over the cinema audience and, completing its self-conscious wink at the viewer, spins to alight on the face of awestruck eight-year-old Carl – whose pilot goggles will remind you of your 3D glasses if you’re playing the game right. With the unspoken, lyrical articulation that characterises much of Pixar’s best work, these opening seconds capture the film’s peculiar charm and poignancy, which rest on a bittersweet seesaw between past and present, the ideal and the real.

The film’s unlikely protagonists – crotchety septuagenarian widower Carl and barrel-shaped eight-year-old Russell (voiced with breathy, gap-toothed gusto by non-professional Jordan Nagai) – fit the well-worn odd-couple mould, yet also encapsulate all that feels so nattily contemporary about _Up_. Where _WALL-E_ ’s futuristic space odyssey was too photo-realistically pristine for some, _Up_ sweeps Pixar gloriously and cartoonishly back into earth’s orbit.

Fittingly for Pixar’s first feature film to be conceived in 3D (though under its Disney umbrella _Bolt_ was officially first past the post), _Up_ makes novel use of the format. In particular, the final airborne zeppelin showdown between Carl and Muntz, his childhood hero-turned-villain (part Howard Hughes, part Charles Lindbergh), is used to transmit a sense of vertiginous, as opposed to just inanely eye-popping, depth. Yet for all its sense of carefully captured zeitgeist, _Up_’s actual narrative feels as though it might have been feverishly conceived on the back of a beer mat. It more than gets away with it, magpieing from balloon-fuelled Phileas Fogg adventure, doffing its cap to Miyazaki along the way, to a lost world populated by a hierarchical race of ‘talking’ dogs.

What prevents _Up_ from feeling merely ragtag is, on one level, the consistent laugh-out-loud humour; more unexpectedly, it’s the lyrically rendered themes of grief, childlessness and nostalgia that course through the film. These are established in the opening minutes with a remarkable wordless montage, which plays out Carl’s marriage to his sweetheart Ellie, the subsequent discovery of her infertility, and the daily travails that prevent the couple reaching Paradise Falls – their South American Shangri-la – until creeping old age and infirmity mean it’s too late. Building from here, Michael Giacchino’s outstanding thematic score, surpassing his earlier work on _The Incredibles_ and _Ratatouille_, provides _Up_’s heartbeat. Shifting from heady waltz to wistful piano solo, a simple recurring melody encapsulates the persistent pull of ever deferred childhood dreams, at once nostalgic and fantastical.

These are themes as deeply imbued in _Up_’s aesthetic as they are in its characterisation and narrative. The opening newsreel sequence, for example, was run through 16mm optical film to effect the requisite ‘authentic’ wobbliness our senses expect. Electronic musicians have long sought to emulate analogue sound, and a similar trick is at work here. Like Henry Selick’s _Coraline_, which opens with a stunning sequence of minutely observed needlework, _Up_ paradoxically expresses its technical sophistication through such exquisite fetishising of the hand-crafted, the palpably manmade and perishable, whether it’s crackly archive footage, Ellie’s dog-eared scrapbook or the cherished, rusty soda-bottle lid – ‘the Ellie badge’ – that Carl wears on his lapel. It’s more than a sentimental sweetener to forestall criticism of CGI’s ‘flawlessness’, though. In _Up_’s case, such styling enhances a delightful tale that manages to celebrate its rich storytelling heritage while simultaneously ushering in the new. Another first for Pixar: reducing audiences of critics to weeping into their 3D glasses.  
**Sophie Ivan, _Sight and Sound_, October 2009**
<br><br>

**UP**<br>

_Directed by:_ Pete Docter<br>

_Co-directed by:_ Bob Peterson<br>

©: Disney Enterprises, Inc., Pixar<br>

_a Pixar Animation Studios film_<br>

_Presented by:_ Walt Disney Pictures<br>

_Created by:_ Pixar Talking Pictures

_Distributed by:_ Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures

_Executive Producers:_ John Lasseter,  
Andrew Stanton

_Produced by:_ Jonas Rivera

_Associate Producer:_ Denise Ream

_Pre-production Producer:_ Kori Rae

_Pixar Senior Creative Teams:_ Brad Bird,  
Brenda Chapman, John Lasseter, Gary Rydstrom, Andrew Stanton, Lee Unkrich

_Production Manager:_ Mark Nielsen

_Post-production Supervisor:_ Paul Cichocki

_Director of Editorial/Post-production:_ Bill Kinder

_Post-production Supervisor, Video:_ Cynthia Slavens

_Post-production Manager:_ Eric Pearson

_Script Supervisor:_ Lorien McKenna

_Casting by:_ Kevin Reher, Natalie Lyon

_Screenplay by:_ Bob Peterson, Pete Docter

_Additional Screenplay Material:_ Ronnie Del Carmen

_Story by:_ Pete Docter, Bob Peterson,  
Tom McCarthy

_Story Supervisor:_ Ronnie Del Carmen

_Story Manager:_ Shannon Ryan

_Story Artists:_ James S. Baker, Ken Bruce,

Enrico Casarosa, Josh Cooley, Rob Gibbs,

Justin Hunt, Bill Presing, Tony Rosenast,

Bobby Alcid Rubio, Peter Sohn, Nick Sung

_Creative Development:_ Mary Coleman,  
Kiel Murray, Karen Paik

_Story Co-ordinators:_ Veronica Watson, Brian Wright

_Director of Photography - Camera:_ Patrick Lin

_Director of Photography - Lighting:_  
Jean-Claude Kalache

_Stereoscopic 3-D:_  
_Dir Stereoscopic Prod:_ Joshua Hollander

_Stereoscopic Supervisor:_ Bob Whitehill

_Technical Lead:_ Sandra Karpman

_Technical Consultant:_ Darwyn Peachey

_Manager:_ Paul McAfee

_Co-ordinator:_ Courtney Casper

_Supervising Technical Director:_ Steve May

_Supervising Animator:_ Scott Clark

_Animation Manager:_ A.J. Riebli III

_Directing Animators:_ Shawn Krause,  
Dave Mullins, Michael Venturini

_Fix Animation Lead:_ Andrew Beall

_Crowds Animation Lead:_ Arik Ehle

_Animation Co-ordinators:_ Kate Ranson-Walsh, Jaclyn Simon, Russell J. Stough

_Effects Supervisor:_ Gary Bruins

_Effects Manager:_ Mary Van Escobar

_Lighting Managers:_ Pamela Darrow, Becky Neiman

_Technical Lighting Lead:_ Mitch Kopelman

_Sequence Lighting Leads:_ Lloyd Bernberg,

Chris Fowler, Andrew Pienaar, Jonathan Pytko, Sudeep Rangaswamy, Michael Sparber

_Character Supervisor:_ Thomas Jordan

_Character Manager:_ Deirdre Warin

_Character Modelling/Articulation Lead:_  
Tom Sanocki

_Character Shading/Groom Lead:_ Robert Moyer

_Layout Manager:_ Dana Murray

_Layout Co-ordinator:_ Stephen Krug

_Sets Supervisor:_ John Halstead

_Sets Manager:_ Kevin Gordon

_Sets Modelling/Dressing Lead:_ Sophie Vincelette

_Sets Shading Lead:_ Colin Hayes Thompson

_Sets Materials Lead:_ Eric Andraos

_Matte Paint Lead:_ Alex Harvill

_Sets Technical Leads:_ Maxwell Planck,

Fareed Behmaram-Mosavat

_Editor:_ Kevin Nolting

_Editorial Managers:_ Laura Leganza Reynolds, Shannon Ryan

_Editor:_ Katherine Ringgold

_Associate Editor:_ Gregory Amundson

_Editorial Co-ordinator:_ Dallis Anderson

_Production Designer:_ Ricky Nierva

_Shading Art Direction:_ Bryn Imagire

_Art Manager:_ Jennifer Birmingham

_Character Art Direction:_ Daniel López-Muñoz, Albert Lozano

_Environment Art Direction:_ Nat McLaughlin,

Don Shank

_Lighting Direction:_ Ralph Eggleston,  
Harley Jessup, Lou Romano

_Creative Film Services Title Design:_ Susan Bradley

_Creative Film Services Graphics:_ Laura Meyer

_Manager Image Mastering:_ Mariko Nobori

_Lead Engineers:_ Dominic Glynn, Rod Bogart

_Music by:_ Michael Giacchino

_Conducted by:_ Tim Simonec

_Orchestrated by:_ Tim Simonec

_Music Supervisor:_ Tom MacDougall

_Score Co-ordinator:_ Andrea Datzman

_Executive Music Producer:_ Chris Montan

_Production Music Editing:_ David Slusser

_Music Editor:_ Stephen M. Davis

_Recorded/Mixed by:_ Dan Wallin

_Sound Designer:_ Tom Myers

_Original Dialogue Mixers:_ Vince Caro, Doc Kane

_Re-recording Mixers:_ Michael Semanick,  
Tom Myers

_Voice Cast:_

Ed Asner _(Carl Fredricksen)_

Christopher Plummer _(Charles Muntz)_

Jordan Nagai _(Russell)_

Bob Peterson _(Dug)_

Delroy Lindo _(Beta)_

Jerome Ranft _(Gamma)_

Bob Peterson _(Alpha)_

John Ratzenberger _(construction foreman Tom)_

David Kaye _(newsreel announcer)_

Elie Docter _(young Ellie)_

Jeremy Leary _(young Carl)_

Mickie T. McGowan _(Police Officer Edith)_

Danny Mann _(construction worker Steve)_

Don Fullilove _(Nurse George)_

Jess Harnell _(Nurse AJ)_

Josh Cooley _(Omega)_

Pete Docter _(Campmaster Strauch)_

_Additional voices:_

Mark Andrews, Bob Bergen, Brenda Chapman, Emma Coats, John Cygan, Paul Eiding, Teresa Ganzel, Sherry Lynn, Laraine Newman, Teddy Newton, Jeff Pidgeon, Valerie LaPointe, Jan Rabson, Bob Scott

_Created/Produced at:_ Pixar Animation Studios

USA 2009©

102 mins
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTI4OTYxODM3OF19
-->