_+ Q&A with Jerzy Skolimowski (Wednesday 29 March only)_

**‘Walkover’ reviewed at Cannes**  
Like the main festival, the Fourth International Critics’ Week was not unduly burdened by masterpieces this year. But there was one film which justified the whole week: Jerzy Skolimowski’s _Walkover_. Skolimowski, a product of the Lodz school, has already directed one feature film – _Rysopis_ – but he is best known as the co-scriptwriter of _Knife in the Water_ and _The Innocent Sorcerers_. It is easy enough to describe the tone of _Walkover_. Anyone who knows the two films Skolimowski co-authored will recognise the same coolness, that of the uncommitted outsider in a very committed society. His hero is the man who doesn’t want to sing party songs, who doesn’t want to be on factory committees, the man who is thrown out of university because he is a ‘disturbing element’. The hooligan, to use that much beloved Slav term.

Andrzej is about to turn 30. After being thrown out of his engineering college, he has made a kind of living going round the country participating in boxing matches for ‘beginners’. After 50 or so of these combats, people have begun to catch on to the fact that he is no longer a beginner. Arriving in a new town, an ex-schoolmate (actually the girl who denounced him years ago) tries to persuade him to take a job in the local factory. He cannot resist entering the semi-finals of another of these beginners’ contests, and he wins yet again.  
The girl, however, has failed in her first job, and Andrzej decides to skip town with her, especially since the finals that night will put him up against a much tougher opponent. The end of the film succeeds in being at once surprising, logical, and ambiguous.

Much harder to describe is Skolimowski’s style. The photography is silvery grey and sharply fuzzy. Although the film (which lasts 74 minutes) is made up of only 34 shots, the effect is excitingly disjointed, syncopated. It would seem that Skolimowski’s method is entirely paradoxical, not to say dialectical. From a combination of opposites comes a new synthesis. _Walkover_ is extremely subjective: from time to time the action stops while the hero confronts the camera in what can only be termed soliloquies. And yet the author also manages to achieve, through the clear-eyed rigour of his approach, a kind of desperate objectivity. This is all the more remarkable in that Skolimowski not only wrote and directed the film, he also boxed it: that is to say, he plays the principal character.  
**Richard Roud, _Sight and Sound_, Summer 1965**

**A contemporary review**  
The central character from _Identification Marks: None_ (again played, and now boxed, by Skolimowski himself) has reached his 30th year without settling for any of the unappealing roles that his increasingly bureaucratised society has to offer. On the eve of his birthday (‘A birthday is the best time to think of death’), he is still drifting in circles, perennially fighting in boxing bouts for ‘beginners’ and carrying off the same inevitable prizes – wrist-watches and transistor radios that he tries without much success to sell on a glutted market – too old to pass much longer for a beginner, and not good enough to take on more established fighters. Appropriately, it’s the passing of the years and the emergence of a new younger generation that provides _Walkover_ with its theme, linking Skolimowski’s essentially baroque and superficially energetic incidents through a common mood of imminent defeat. (Indeed, a recurring couplet suggests that aggressive energy is itself no more than a foolhardy attempt to compensate for the passing of youth.) Death hangs, as often as not unmentioned, in the air – from the railway suicide which neither of the principals appears to notice, to the car crash which interrupts Andrzej’s abortive dinner date with Teresa and sends him off on a manic, freewheeling run through the town, to the old man’s dog that is given a piece of cake for its birthday and promptly drops down dead. All the old things are being replaced: ‘A year ago there were goats grazing here’, an elderly worker tells Andrzej as he makes his tour of the massive steel structures; while the factory manager, shifting uneasily behind his vast desk, observes that ‘young people are terribly gifted nowadays’, Andrzej and Teresa no doubt representing as great a threat to him as the new generation of boxers does to Andrzej.

Also permeating the film is the idea of the arbitrary unfairness of redundancy: a 30-year-old president would be the youngest in the world, but a 30-year-old boxer is a has-been. Nor is age the only source of ambiguity: the hero’s feeling for Teresa combines an inseparable mixture of love, hate and indifference; and on their visit to Teresa’s old convent, the miracle-working priest of her childhood turns out, like his miracles, to be a complete fraud. As in Skolimowski’s subsequent films, it’s the brittle tension between energy and despair that gives _Walkover_ its dramatic life, and the visual element (only 34 takes) that provides the excitement: the city’s ugly, rising industrial skyline; the hero’s leap from the moving train; the frantic ride back to the factory. Skolimowski’s caustic metaphor for the human condition (‘I’ll show you how to fight just to fight, when you’ve nothing left to fight for’) is never less than exhilarating.  
**Jan Dawson, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, December 1971**<br>
<br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTQ1MzkyNzYxN119
-->