

Despite being full of visual clichés and horror tropes, this feels entirely unique; it must be down to the command Larraz has over the medium, crafting a haunting and unnerving descent into madness. It’s a film that, at times, clearly signals where it might be going, but proves all the more shocking for actually going there.  The production design is stunning and the performances properly unnerving.  
**Mark Jenkin**

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

The name of director José Ramón Larraz is synonymous with his most commercially viable film to date. _Vampyres_ (1974), a favourite among Eurocult and horror aficionados, lays no claim to artistic pretensions with its narrative of two lesbian wildcats on the loose in the English countryside. Taking his first films _Whirlpool_ (1970), _Deviation_ (1971) and _The House That Vanished_ (1974) into consideration, with _Whirlpool_ upon its initial release described as a ‘genuinely sickening film’ by critic Roger Ebert, it is no wonder that Spanish-born Larraz is still sought out today by fans of European horror cinema. As an independent filmmaker, Larraz is marginal at best, his filmography a side note in the history of European horror. But the film that made it to Cannes, _Symptoms_ (1974), retitled for release as _The Blood Virgin_ in November 1977, willingly traded sleaze for a more stylish approach to Gothic suspense and stands comparison to Roman Polanski’s _Repulsion_ (1965). _Symptoms_ was surprisingly selected as the official UK entry for the 1974 Cannes International Film Festival – over Ken Russell’s _Mahler_ – and was, until now, featured on the ‘BFI 75 Most Wanted’ list. This change in register is as mysterious as the film itself. Indeed, how _does_ a director who earned his stripes in the questionable trade of (s)exploitation production end up showing at the most prestigious film festival of them all?

Although no straightforward remake of _Repulsion_, _Symptoms_’ point of departure (a waif-like heroine’s descent into madness) and formal composition are very much the same, strikingly underscored by Larraz’s appropriation of the film’s pacing, timbre, costumes, actors’ direction and staging of essential scenes to suit his own means. It was his first all-British production and an exercise in what came to be considered as a typically English speciality – the ghost story – and encompasses all of his sensibilities and directorial flourishes. _Symptoms_ bears a striking resemblance to the films of Pete Walker and the cycle of bleak psychological thrillers Hammer produced during the 1970s. Set in a present-day environment, their interest lay with man’s ‘demons of the mind’ and groped for monsters under the skin instead of those franchised by the Hammer monster market. They revived the original premise of the literary Gothic by displaying a range of psychological issues such as schizophrenia, paranoia, excessive fear, hysteria, isolation and sadism. Picking up where _Repulsion_ left off, Larraz added androphobia to that checklist, a motif he conjures up in a number of other films including _La visita del vicio_ (1978) and _Vampyres_.

Upon returning from time spent convalescing in Switzerland, Helen Ramsey (Angela Pleasence) retreats to her estate in the woods of England. She invites her friend Anne West (Lorna Heilbron) to keep her company. The idea of a rustic vacation appeals to Anne, who seeks solitude to write and wants to get a decent amount of soul-searching done on the end of a romantic relationship. The girls read, prepare their meals and tour the forest in perfect unison, content to while the hours away in comfortable bouts of semi-silence. At this stage, Helen’s introverted behaviour occasionally seems a bit erratic – especially in relation to the presence of Brady, the odd-job man (Peter Vaughan) but not alarming. When Anne shows an interest in the portrait of Cora, Helen’s ‘friend’ whom she has not seen for a while but whose presence in the Ramsey household is all-pervading, she touches upon the open wound of a traumatic event Helen had rather forgotten about. Portraits are salient set-pieces in all of Larraz’s films and betray his education in art history. Like no other, Larraz understands the chilling quality of ‘being watched’, whether it be through the eyes of a spectator with intentions of murder or through the re-animated likeness of a photograph or painting, much as one would saunter through an art gallery or museum and have the uncanny sensation of the artwork looking back. He frequently underscores their importance with blasts of montage and swerving camera movements, and in _Symptoms_, lets Cora’s portrait herald in a return of the repressed.

Larraz’s films riff on the Gothic mansion’s potential for setting up mood and atmosphere. It is one of his favoured staple features. In _Symptoms_, it is the direct playground for Helen’s haywired psyche. Much in line with the literary tradition of the Gothic that equates the identity of the house with its owner, Helen is the estate she lives in, and its visitors the unwilling partakers in a psychodrama they were not meant to intrude. Even the weather conditions are seen to interact with Helen’s troubled state of mind while she falls ill with a surge of anxiety whenever a neighbouring storm approaches. Larraz handles this trope to a dual end by making the best out of the storm’s poetic appeal and by using it as a cue to alert the viewer of important narrative events to come.

The mirror is a key element in understanding how Larraz actively compared notes with Polanski on the subject of directing a thriller. For one, it brings about the first shock-effect in the exact same manner that Polanski applied it in _Repulsion_. A pre-eminent Gothic prop, mirrors involuntarily bring out what is brewing beneath the surface. Other substantial echoes to _Repulsion_ are found on _Symptoms_’ audio track. Larraz sets Helen’s nightly terrors to the ticking of a grandfather clock, replicating the agitated alarm clock Polanski used both in _Repulsion_ and in _Rosemary’s Baby_ (1968).

Helen’s fear of Brady is also indebted to _Repulsion_. Brady wears the same ‘wife-beater’ style shirt Carol finds so distasteful on the construction worker who leers after her in the street and later picks up in the bathroom. When Anne mentions Brady’s possible attraction to Helen, Larraz underscores her reply (‘he disgusts me’) with the chopping sound of Brady’s hatchet closing in, fuelling another Gothic trope by drawing inspiration from Polanski’s original. Gothic works of fiction are filled to the brim with sexual power politics. They thrive on sexual anxieties faced with a so-called male or female Other and, within the genre of the ‘Female Gothic’, often include Bluebeardian narratives of men bringing home their second wives to a residence that is still inhabited by the presence of a former spouse, living or dead. In _Symptoms_, Anne is the unsuspecting newcomer who unravels her hostess’ darkest secret.

_Symptoms_ reaches a fever pitch with a drawn-out dialogue session between Helen and Brady. This showdown between the sexes is the most explicitly rehashed scene from _Repulsion_, its original the episode in which Carol kills the landlord who leers at her. Both women act out of self-defence, but have to wait for an opening to get rid of their foes. The scenes are near-identical, their staging, identical. The girls bide their time while their antagonists circle the couch and then strike a ferocious attack. With the shot that I for the sake of argument would like to label the ‘_Repulsion_-shot’, the actual kill is seen from the victim’s point of view, framed within an expressive, tilted, low-angle shot that represents its perpetrator’s state of delirium. Even with _Symptoms_ being steeped knee-deep in the vocabulary of its predecessor, it is far more than a reiteration of Polanski’s tropes. _Repulsion’s_ text fuelled Larraz’s own infatuation with the Gothic. The result is a wonderful entry in the short-lived craze of British psycho-thrillers and a flamboyant Spaniard’s take on a quintessentially British genre film.  
**Vanity Celis, booklet essay from _Symptoms_ Blu-ray/DVD (BFI, 2016)**

**Stigma**

My favourite of the highly influential _Ghost Stories for Christmas_ series. Although it had a contemporary setting, it now feels almost as period as the MR James adaptations. I love the creeping sense of hopelessness that [Lawrence Gordon] Clark creates, albeit through the slenderest of means. And the ending is devastating. There are several references to this film in _Enys Men_.

Mark Jenkin

<![endif]-->

**A GHOST STORY FOR CHRISTMAS: STIGMA**

_Directed by_: Lawrence Gordon Clark  
©: BBC  
_Production Company_: BBC  
_Producer_: Rosemary Hill  
_Production Unit Manager_: Elizabeth Small  
_Production Assistants_: Daphne Phipps,  
Val Sheppard  
_[Written] By_: Clive Exton  
_Lighting Cameraman_: John Turner  
_Film Editor_: Dave King  
_Designer_: Stuart Walker  
_Costume Designer_: Linda Woodfield  
_Make-up Artist_: Madeleine Gaffney  
_Sound Recordist_: Mike Savage  
_Dubbing Mixer_: Peter Rann

_Cast:_

Kate Binchy _(Katherine)_  
Peter Bowles _(Peter)_  
Maxine Gordon _(Verity)_  
Jon Laurimore _(doctor)_  
Christopher Blake _(Richard)_  
John Judd _(Dave)_

BBC tx 28.12.1977

UK 1977

29 mins

**SYMPTOMS**

_Directed by_: Joseph Larraz

©: Finiton Productions

_Produced by_: Jean Dupuis

_Production Supervisor_: Jack Rix

_Assistant Director_: Ted Morley

_2nd Assistant Director_: Chris Kenny

_Continuity_: Josie Fulford

_Screenplay by_: Joseph Larraz, Stanley Miller

_Director of Photography_: Trevor Wrenn

_Lighting by_: Southern Lighting (Facilities) Ltd

_Camera Operator_: Alan Boast

_Chief Electrician_: Barry Miller

_Film Editor_: Brian Smedley-Aston

_Assistant Editor_: Geoff R. Brown

_Art Director_: Kenneth Bridgeman

_Assistant Art Director_: Chris Cook

_Property Masters_: Robert Hedges, Robert Douglas

_Construction Manager_: Ronald Coleman

_Wardrobe Mistress_: Dulcie Midwinter

_Make-up_: Bunty Phillips

_Hairdresser_: Bobbie Smith

_Processed by_: The Rank Laboratories

_Music by_: John Scott

_Sound Recordists_: Trevor Carless, Ken Barker

_Dubbing Editors_: David Campling,  
Barry McCormick

_Made at_: Pinewood Studios

_Cast:_

Angela Pleasence _(Helen Ramsey)_

Peter Vaughan _(Brady)_

Lorna Heilbron _(Anne West)_

Nancy Nevinson _(Hannah)_

Ronald O’Neil _(John)_

Marie-Paul Mailleux _(Cora)_

Michael Grady _(Nick)_

Raymond Huntley _(Burke)_

UK/Belgium 1974

93 mins

_Symptoms_ (Dual Format Edition) is available to buy from the BFI Shop: shop.bfi.org.uk/symptoms-flipside-032-dual-format-edition.html
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE1NjUxNDczXX0=
-->