


<![endif]-->

_+ intro by writer Caryl Phillips (Tuesday 24 October only)_

In _Playing Away_ the Brixton Conquistadores, a black cricket team from south London, accepts an invitation to play a ‘friendly’ charity game in a rural, gentrified Suffolk village. The cricket match is the highlight of the village’s ‘Third World Week’ and the all-white villagers are a mixture of old colonials, well-meaning public school types, and bigoted country yokels. The fictitious village of Sneddington is a throwback to the type of sleepy picture-postcard village seen in Ealing film comedies of the 1950s, so on their arrival the Conquistadores are warmly received in the village square. When the Brixton team roll up in their battered mini-bus, they are confronted with an embarrassing opening ceremony in which a brass band plays ‘Island in the Sun’. In spite of this, hostilities soon surface from the locals, and the visiting Brixtonians retaliate. One film critic described the film as ‘a sort of all-black _EastEnder_s meets all-white _The Archers_.’

The script is by the black novelist and playwright Caryl Phillips – who was born on the Caribbean island of St Kitts, but raised in Leeds and Birmingham – and throughout the story he cleverly highlights the cultural clashes between the two teams. Occasionally the confrontations are explosive, but generally _Playing Away_ is a gentle, humorous film. The coming together of the two cricket teams is hardly friendly, but for the most part _Playing Away_ is very funny. Anyone expecting deep social commentary will be disappointed for this is first and foremost light entertainment. Said Phillips in an interview with Tony Sewell in _The Voice_ newspaper (22 November 1986): ‘It doesn’t deal with the ills of the black community. My motives were different. I wanted to make a film that was entertaining and interesting – that would appeal to as many people as possible.’ However, Phillips’ does give the film some serious insights into the black characters that distance them from the usual one-dimensional stereotypes perpetuated in popular British cinema. Consequently there are some sharp and lively performances from a formidable cast of black British actors who were clearly overjoyed to participate in a feature film that celebrated Britain’s black community instead of portraying them as ‘problems’ or the butt of the joke. The excellent black cast included Brian Bovell, Gary Beadle, Jim Findley, Archie Pool, Stefan Kalipha, Joseph Marcell and Suzette Llewellyn. However, though primarily an ensemble piece, _Playing Away_ does have a leading man: the brilliant Norman Beaton. He plays Willie Boy, the peace-loving team captain who is desperate to hold everything together, mostly in a drunken haze, while trying to decide whether or not to return to the Caribbean after finding the ‘Mother Country’ something of a disappointment.

The film is the second fiction feature directed by the Trinidadian Horace Ové. His first, _Pressure_ (1975), was funded by the British Film Institute and dealt with the then-timely subject of troubled black youths in Britain’s inner cities. He said he was drawn to _Playing Away_ because it used cricket ‘as a metaphor of relations between West Indians and the English. Cricket is the one game that West Indians are very proud of and very good at, and it’s the one game that they know they beat the old masters at. I particularly liked the idea of pointing up the ridiculousness of racism, on both sides, and exploring how it enters into people’s lives and what takes place.’ But I also wanted to make the film genuinely funny.’

Some critics complained that the film looked as if it was made for television, while others commented that some of the white characters came across as stereotypical oiks, with the black characters getting all the good lines. After its premiere at the 1986 London Film Festival, _Playing_ _Away_ was given a general release the following year and was popular, in spite of an embarrassing marketing slogan: ‘a really black comedy!’ It was later shown on Channel 4 television. It deserves to be seen again, and recognised for not only holding a place in the history of British cinema as one of the very few films to have a black writer and director, but for being a minor classic. Funny, poignant, affectionate, _Playing Away_ is a real winner.

The clever and charismatic Norman Beaton is impressive from start to finish. In the 1970s Beaton became one of Britain’s leading stage and screen actors. When he was named Best Film Actor in 1977 by the Variety Club of Great Britain (for _Black Joy_), he was the first black British actor to be honoured with a film award. Among his most memorable television successes were _The Fosters_ (1976-7), the first all-black situation comedy series; _Black Christmas_ (1977); _Empire Road_ (1978-9), Britain’s first all-black drama series; _Nice_ (1984); _Big George Is Dead_ (1987); and _Little Napoleons_ (1993), but his most famous role was the manic barber shop owner in the long-running situation comedy series _Desmond’s_ (1989-94) on Channel 4.

Towards the end of his life, Norman Beaton reflected on the roles available to black actors in Britain: ‘My own view is that what you’ve seen me in are the only roles that are available for black men in this country, and they don’t really reflect our views, our understanding of life, our intelligence, or where we are coming from. In that respect I would say that Caryl Phillips’ scenario for _Playing Away_ did get around that particular hurdle. It lived up to nearly all the expectations that black people ought to be living up to. But what I find difficult to come to terms with is the absence of a heroic figure like Paul Robeson in all the work I’ve done. There is no writer on that scale, or in those grand, magnificent terms for film and television about a black figure who we admire or aspire to be like.’

Norman Beaton died in Georgetown, Guyana in 1994. Carmen Munroe, who played Beaton’s wife in _Desmond’s_, told _The Voice_: ‘He put his whole life and soul into any part he was asked to play and never spared himself. He worked at his craft and produced brilliance. His particular blend of comic energy and professional application will be missed most keenly in the future when excellence is sought.’  
**Stephen Bourne, article from BFI DVD booklet of _Playing Away_**  

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbODA1NjcyOTgxXX0=
-->