<![endif]-->

_The Portrait of a Lady_ bestows on the world one of the greatest heroines in fiction. As read by Campion’s film, Isabel Archer (Nicole Kidman) is a gauche and difficult young American on the brink of womanhood, whose uneasy metamorphosis – emotional, moral or spiritual – takes place as she ventures through a Europe that is both glittering palace and cold, forbidding mausoleum. In the talk of those around her (and this is a film about talk, rather than the silence of _The Piano_, with the often brutal admissions of the protagonists delivered in a smartingly clipped style), she is subjected to scrutiny, dissection and ultimately terrible deception, as she befriends the intriguing sophisticate Madame Merle (Barbara Hershey) and the decadent artefact collector Gilbert Osmond John Malkovich), two mendacious Americans with an affected – and infected – sense of their ‘European-ness’. Isabel’s tale, as she inherits a legacy and consequently becomes a woman of means, with seemingly more freedom to choose what to do with her life, is not just one of female individuation, but of the defining of one culture in the face of another.

In this sense it is revealing that at the press conference held before shooting started, Campion explained how when she first read the novel, she identified with the naive young Isabel – that to be from the Antipodes in the twentieth century was akin to the American experience in the nineteenth century. Now Campion journeys to Europe (and Hollywood) for this film, and may at last shake the label ‘best woman director from New Zealand’ (she is so obviously in the world league, period). _The Portrait of a Lady_ is a tale about women on the verge of journeys in many ways.

The contemporary prologue, which frames the film, succinctly conveys what kind of literary adaptation this is. Campion and screenwriter Laura Jones (who previously worked with her on _An Angel at My Table_) offer a reading that seems to hark back to the first youthful exploration of the novel, and then to elaborate on it. To purloin James’ own metaphor, Campion has returned to the cold Jamesian House of Fiction that she once built in her head, has dusted down the rooms of her choosing and installed the audience.

With the type of visceral sting she executes so well, Campion launches the unsuspecting viewer slap into the tale (boldly skipping the novel’s first 100-odd pages), with us party to Isabel’s early days in England, fresh off the boat from America, and fending off one of her suitors, the solemn Lord Warburton (not presented as a buffoon or prig, but just plain decent), as he makes a desperate proposal to her. The film’s almost suffocatingly intense pace allows little respite as it takes its grand two-plus hour tour (even Wojciech Kilar’s restrained score, quivering with repressed emotions, is sparingly used). There is no polite build-up, and no establishing long-shot introductions: rather we come immediately face-to-face with the heroine and her dilemmas, as she looks for a way out of a tight corner. Isabel is faced with the proposal in the garden (here full of snarly trees) which so many romances build up to for example, in the present Jane Austen vogue, Austen’s novels have been read as so much bumbling pre-prandial to the jolly betrothals. Campion’s film, by contrast, starts with a refusal which is mixed with a nostalgia for another time, when there could have been a simpler response, as Isabel states: ‘There was one moment when I would have given my little finger to say yes.’ (Though Jones’ succinct script tinkers only slightly with James’ own interlocution, here it seems deliberately to recall _The_ _Piano_’s Ada, who did give her index finger to do a version of this.) This is a gruelling, hard scene, accentuated in the close-up: Nicole Kidman’s scrubbed white skin fills the screen, her unruly auburn hair swept wispily on top of her head, her eyes full of trepidation, tears proudly clinging to the lower lids, not uncouth enough to fall. And having taken us up the garden path with this opening, we are snapped straight into a claustrophobic, dimly lit world, where Isabel’s face often appears as luminous as an opal in the shadows around her.

Most striking about the garden sequence is the degree to which Kidman reminds us of her Antipodean sister Judy Davis, bracing herself for her future at the opening of Gillian Armstrong’s _My Brilliant Career_ (1979}. Like Davis’ boisterous Sybylla, Isabel is at first depicted as an awkward sort, with a determined stride that would have horrified the deportment tutors of the day. Worse still, she’s the kind of girl wont to probe her walking boots with a hearty sniff, obviously with little regard for the niceties of ‘lady-like’ etiquette. No, Isabel is a cerebral type, who collects words (‘nihilism’, for instance, is written out in neat scroll and pegged to her wardrobe): an intelligent woman, though without Sybylla’s obvious vocational aspirations, or those of her journalist compatriot Harriet Stackpole in _Portrait_.

From _A Girl’s Own Story_, through _Two Friends_, _Sweetie_, _An Angel at My Table_ and _The Piano_, Campion’s heroines have been truculent individuals, tripped up by their desires (and one may sweepingly suggest her films can be measured by how they keep their footing among all the treading of water and land). Her work has been so deliriously uncensored that she taps into the most perverse parts of the female psyche, unafraid to deal with women who are the undoing of themselves. At the troubled and therefore fascinating centre of her work is the exploration of female masochism, the match to Scorsese’s excursions into the male equivalent. Patently there in _The Piano_, this is no less present in _Portrait_, where Isabel allows herself to be ensnared by Osmond into the most emotionally sado-masochistic of relationships. Malkovich, at first apparently revamping his Valmont from _Dangerous Liaisons_, proves terrifyingly persuasive as the spiteful and contemptuous Osmond. Her path is beset by things for her perhaps to stumble on, bringing her down to the primordial moral level of some of those around her. But (as she claims), ‘I will not crawl.’ The film follows this, the camera obsessed with the trailing of her skirt-train, to which new flounces are added as her financial and marital status increases.

And half Isabel’s battle is for herself not to become a beautiful thing, an ornate bauble in Osmond’s collection. Campion traces her journey, from _ingénue_ to a woman caught up in an elaborate style (at times she wears a net-like lace veil that seems to emphasise just how snared she is). Tightly shot, this film deals mostly in close-ups: it is, after all, about portraits. And what is most striking is just how many portraits there are – with Kidman’s own metamorphosing (even at one point taking on the mask-like appearance of the starkly attractive Madame Merle). In a tightly wound performance, Kidman gives very little away. But we can see her looking, her blue eyes, so proudly loath to shed tears, soaking up everything around her. And if we peer at the portraits long enough, we may discern what is going on in the headstrong head at their centre, as she peers at her reflection and finally comes to recognise herself – though such self-recognition rarely provides easy answers. In a film haunted by Eros and Thanatos, caught up in their dry embrace (snatches of Schubert’s _Death and the Maiden_ are heard on the soundtrack) the path to love seems one of psychotic self-destruction.

For Campion does not like easy endings – after the choppy finale of _The Piano_, _The Portrait of a Lady_ is no less bracing. The white lightning of the final scene seems to spring as swiftly as the opening, as Campion catches the perilous ambiguity of Isabel’s destiny. It is an astounding moment: a sudden cold flash in which whole audiences of presumptuous girls may find existential truths. Then, with the door of this House of Fiction closed securely behind, Campion leaves us asking of ourselves what other paths are there to be followed.  
**Lizzie Francke, _Sight and Sound_, November 1996**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTEwNjM4NzE5OF19
-->