<![endif]-->

It may not be the definitive western, but it might just be the most western: part parody, part eulogy, part apotheosis, _Once upon a Time in the West_ is every narrative and formal cliché, every grandiose gesture, every ambiguous, every subversive, every troubling commentary on American history that its parent genre deals in condensed into a sumptuously operatic melodrama that stands tall as one of the most purely cinematic spectacles ever put to film.

**Alan Mattli, _Sight and Sound_, Winter 2022-23**

Sergio Leone’s operatic, elegiac 1968 Western _Once Upon a Time in the West_ regularly sits at the top of many people’s favourite films of all-time list, and with good reason: think of Ennio Morricone’s unforgettable score, or the dialogue-free opening sequence that lingers on three hitmen as they wait for Charles Bronson’s ‘Harmonica’ to arrive in town by train – a masterpiece of slow-building tension. Then there’s the endlessly quotable dialogue (‘People scare better when they’re dying’) and the pitch-perfect performances, with Henry Fonda playing against type as the evil Frank, Jason Robards as Cheyenne, and a never-more beautiful Claudia Cardinale as the dignified widow Jill McBain. Leone called his film ‘a ballet of the dead’, and it both celebrated and changed forever the classic Western film.  
**_Sight and Sound_, July 2009**

**A review of the newly released uncut version of the film**  
One is grateful that the vandalism wreaked on this masterpiece has been belatedly repaired. However, it is noticeable that the film’s almost totally hostile critical reception on its initial release focused on complaints about its length and pace.

In reply, one might offer the following remarks from Christopher Frayling’s book [_Spaghetti Westerns_, 1981]:  ‘to divorce Leone’s “formalism”, his “rhetoric”, completely from the content of his films is radically to misinterpret what he is trying to achieve... Leone’s flamboyant display of the “codes” of the Western shows how well he had digested the implications of the early writings of semiologists on _Mythologies_ ­– and it is this display which has been treated by many critics as an (empty) exercise in “formalism”, an over-indulgent use of the medium... But, to my mind, it is precisely the unrestrained quality of Leone’s display in _Once Upon a Time_ which sets the film apart as the finest synthesis of his attempts to transcribe the Hollywood Western.

‘_Once Upon a Time_ is concerned as much with the fictional stereotypes as with the history of the West-specifically, the divorce between “myth” and socioeconomic context, a cinematic study of fictions as distinct from, and finally destroyed by, history... The visual correlatives of the basic themes, the interplay between music and image, the construction of ‘set-pieces’ – all seem to achieve a “control” which leaves most American directors of Westerns (even the formalist ones) standing-albeit with a very different intention, which could only be realised from outside the Hollywood system... In his [Leone’s] terms, the melodramatic gestures or poses (visual and verbal, in a word rhetorical) are inseparable from the relationships (mythical and historical) he wishes to explore. Leone’s treatment of these relationships is intended both to help elucidate the meaning of the West, and to reappraise its trace-the Hollywood Western, a global text’. Hopefully, the reappearance of the missing footage will at least lend support to this verdict.  
**_Monthly Film Bulletin_, August 1983**

It is tempting to see _Once upon a Time in the West_ as the outcome of the meeting of Leone’s cynicism and Bertolucci’s Marxism. In its style and its ambitions it pushed the Italian Western as far as it could go. The full version is certainly one of the most remarkable films of its time – a materialist fairy tale which, where given the chance, struck a chord at the box-office. Leone’s style, evolved in the earlier films, expanded its spare outlines to grandiose but appropriate proportions. The film becomes an epic without pretensions to historical precision (hence the title) but to being an emblematic tale, comparable with Italian political movies like _Quemada_, and also in a sense the ultimate Western.

Most major Western themes are there, but, through Leone’s artificial, operatic style, the film becomes a view from Europe, based on American historical mythology but presenting it precisely as an alien mythology. The traditional function of the Western is undercut and its iconography used to say, in effect, that it does not wash any more: that life in the West, past and present, is nasty, brutish and short; ‘heroes’ and villains pursue money; and nobility comes only through preserving personal dignity, avenging evil, and turning one’s back on the world created by corrupt and crazy moneymakers.  
**David Nicholls, _Sight & Sound_, Winter 1980-81**
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTM3MTc2Mzk2OV19
-->