

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

This post-war drama, recently adapted by Kazuo Ishiguro as _Living_, remains one of Kurosawa’s best loved films. Kanji Watanabe has spent his life as an administrator within the Japanese’s government’s bureaucratic system. A medical diagnosis radically shifts his worldview and finds him reassessing what is important in life. Loosely inspired by Tolstoy’s _The Death of Ivan Ilyich_ and featuring a heartfelt central performance by Takashi Shimura, _Ikiru_ is a work of profound humanism.  
**bfi.org.uk**  

**Gillies MacKinnon on Kurosawa’s ‘Living’**  
I first saw Kurosawa’s _Ikiru_ at the Glasgow art school film society, sitting beside my pal Gerry McGowan who cracked loud jokes all the way through a succession of Bergman, Visconti and Pasolini films. I was just beginning to realise that movies were not only about action but also about stories which can get inside you and alter your way of thinking. I watched _Ikiru_ again last winter during the dead of night, sheltering in a trailer on the outskirts of Atlanta, Georgia where I was directing Steve Martin’s screenplay _A Simple Twist of Fate_. Outside, the special effects team struggled chaotically to construct a snow scene with gallons of freezing detergent. Inside the trailer, I was once again caught up in Kurosawa’s simplicity of story-telling and the film’s unselfconscious quality of acting.

Opening with the diffuse image of an X-ray plate, we immediately know that the theme of the film is death. Kanji Watanabe (played by Takashi Shimura), a senior clerk of the Citizens Section, has spent thirty heartless years at his desk. The narrator tells us that although he walks around, he is as good as dead. Meanwhile, groups of desperate women, who want to reclaim an area of wasteground to make a children’s playground, are shuffled from department to department in a painfully true comic sequence which includes a pest control clerk idly swatting flies.

Watanabe visits the doctor. In the waiting room a patient foresees that the old man has cancer. Gripped by fear, Watanabe changes his seat and turns his face away from the man towards the camera, creating one of the most memorable, recurring images – his large, troubled, soulful face staring into space as events unfold around him.

As the doctors discuss Watanabe’s case among themselves, one of them asks the central question of the drama – faced with six months to live, what would you do? Watanabe is shown walking alone, stunned. A mute soundtrack makes us feel as if we are inside his head and then, suddenly, the noise of traffic explodes and the camera pulls out to reveal the street as vehicles wipe through the frame and obscure him. This is one of the more elaborate set-ups in the film. For the most part, _Ikiru_ leaves a dramatic visual impression because the photography complements the acting without unsettling the scene with tricky camera moves – the looks on faces, the postures, the movement of bodies around rooms and streets are the images that stay in the mind.

Kurosawa cuts hard into scenes to great effect. In a flashback sequence, Watanabe reviews the losses and failures of his life, ending with him slumping down into a chair – cut to him slumping down in real time in a continuous motion, then cut to an elevator descending, which has the effect of pulling the viewer down to Watanabe’s state of mind.

Watanabe is unable to die because he doesn’t know what he has been living for. With half his life savings in his pocket, he asks a drinking partner to show him how to have the good time he has never known. So follows a wild, manic night in recently westernised, neon-lit streets as this naive old man tries hard to live. This includes him buying a white hat which later becomes something of a running gag, prompting various reactions to the ‘new’ Watanabe. Tumbling from nightclub to nightclub, Watanabe’s frenzied mood suddenly changes as he stuns the revellers into silence by singing – from some deep, sorrowful place inside himself – ‘Life is so short, fall in love dear maiden while your lips are still red for there will be no tomorrow.’ _Ikiru_ is worth seeing for this scene alone.

In a later sequence he befriends a vivacious young woman, and there follows a hazardous shot where she excitedly runs into the street towards two oncoming buses. This is the only moment in the film where I feel separated from the action as suddenly you become aware of the camera operator who must have had his ears clipped by the buses.

Watanabe become obsessed with turning the dump into a children’s playground. Combining super-human zeal with a show of humility (which makes the term passive-aggressive seem an understatement), he manages to overcome the inertia of county hall petty bureaucracy and to ignore the threats of gangsters. He then dies, and the remainder of the film brilliantly follows events at his funeral. I love the way in which the characters become caught up in powerful emotional responses _en masse_ – for example, the group of mourning women who pour into the room like wailing banshees and the previously cynical colleagues who collapse in a wave of repentance.

I have wondered how the story would be interpreted by Hollywood if it was remade with a first rate actor such as Jack Lemmon or Burt Lancaster. I suspect the complexity of the flashback structure would be the first thing to go. _Ikiru_ is the story of a man trying to experience life in the few months he has left, and finding the answer in the creation of a children’s playground. The sentimental pitfalls for any modern version are obvious (although, I suspect an earlier Hollywood movie of, let’s say, the 50s might have been closer in spirit to Kurosawa). It’s easy to knock Hollywood with its bright-eyed executives generating scrolls of notes, the formulaic plots and its obsession with previews which – with the cold-blooded influence of those who market movies – ask audiences if there is anything that they don’t like. Even so, I can’t help thinking that this might be one film that could survive a remake, but only if it could be told with the honesty and innocence of the original. The question is have we become too cynical to make this kind of simply-told human story?  
**Gillies MacKinnon, _Sight and Sound_, November 1994**  

**Akira Kurosawa on ‘Living’**  
What I remember best here is the long wake sequence that ends the film, where – from time to time – we see scenes in the hero’s later life. Originally I wanted music all under this long section. I talked it over with Hayasaka and we decided on it and he wrote the score. Yet when it came time to dub, no matter how we did it, the scenes and music simply did not fit. So I thought about it for a long time and then took all the music out. I remember how disappointed Hayasaka was. He just sat there, not saying anything, and the rest of the day he tried to be cheerful. I was sorry I had to do it, yet I had to. There is no way now of telling him how I felt – he is gone.

He was a fine man. It was as though he (with his glasses) were blind and I was deaf. We worked so well together because one’s weakness was the other’s strength. We had been together ten years and then he died. It was not only my own loss – it was music’s loss as well. You don’t meet a person like that twice in your life.

[Kurosawa has mentioned elsewhere the genesis of the idea that resulted in _Ikiru_: Occasionally I think of my death... then I think, how could I ever bear to take a final breath, while living a life like this, how could I leave it? There is, I feel, so much more for me to do – l keep feeling I have lived so little yet. Then I become thoughtful, but not sad. It was from such a feeling that _lkiru_ arose.]  
**Akira Kurosawa, edited by Donald Richie, _Sight and Sound_, July 1964**  

**LIVING (IKIRU)**  
_Director:_ Akira Kurosawa  
_Production Company:_ Toho Co. Ltd.  
_Producer:_ Sojiro Motoki  
_Assistant Directors:_ Hiromichi Horikawa, Sadanobu Marubayashi, Teruo Maru  
_Screenplay:_ Shinobu Hashimoto, Hideo Oguni, Akira Kurosawa  
_Director of Photography:_ Asakazu Nakai  
_Lighting:_ Shigeru Mori  
_Editor:_ Koichi Iwashita  
_Art Director:_ So Matsuyama  
_Music:_ Fumio Hayasaka  
_Sound Recording:_ Fumio Yanoguchi  
_Sound Effects:_ Ichiro Minawa  

**Cast**  
Takashi Shimura _(Kanji Watanabe)_  
Nobuo Kaneko _(Mitsuo, Kanji’s son)_  
Kyoko Seki _(Kazue, Mitsuo’s wife)_  
Miki Odagiri _(Toyo Odagiri)_  
Makoto Kobori _(Kiichi, Kanji’s elder brother)_  
Kumeko Urabe _(Tatsu, Kiichi’s wife)_  
Nobuo Nakamura _(deputy mayor)_  
Kamatari Fujiwara _(Ono, sub-section chief)_  
Minosuke Yamada _(Saito, subordinate clerk)_  
Haruo Tanaka _(Sakai, assistant)_  
Bokuzen Hidari _(O-hara, assistant)_  
Minoru Chiaki _(Noguchi)_  
Shinichi Himori _(Kimura, assistant)_  
Yûnosuke Itô _(novelist)_  
Yoshie Minami _(the maid)_  
Kazuo Abe _(city councillor)_  
Masao Shimizu _(doctor)_  
Isao Kimura _(intern)_  
Atsushi Watanabe _(patient)_  
Yatsuko Tanami _(hostess)_  
Fuyuki Murakami _(newspaperman)_  
Seiji Miyaguchi _(gang boss)_  
Daisuke Katô _(gang member)_  
Kin Sugai, Eiko Miyoshi, Fumiko Homma _(housewives)_  
Ichiro Chiba _(policeman)_  
Toranosuke Ogawa _(park section chief)_  
Tomoo Nagai, Hirayoshi Aono _(reporters)_  
Akira Tani _(old man in bar)_  
Toshiyuki Ichimura _(cabaret pianist)_  

Japan 1952  
141 mins  
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTM1MzM4Mjc1N119
-->