


<![endif]-->

**What’s it about?**

_+ Q&A with directors Chris Buck, Fawn Veerasunthorn, songwriter Julia Michaels, voice actor Ariana DeBose, producers Peter Del Vecho, Juan Pablo Reyes Lancaster Jones and writer/executive producer Jennifer Lee_

Asha lives in the Kingdom of Rosas which is home to a tight-knit community led by King Magnifico, a popular figure who she has a bad feeling about. When Asha makes her extraordinary wish – delivered in a song – she inadvertently summons a star from the sky, who sprinkles magic and inspires Asha to think differently and see that everything is possible. Star comes just in time as the kingdom faces an unknown threat and Asha finds herself right in the middle of the disruption. Disney celebrates its centenary with a new musical comedy that combines the contemporary with the traditional and promises a wish come true for all ages.

**‘Be careful what you wish for!’**

Walt Disney Animation Studios’ all-new musical comedy _Wish_ invites audiences to the magical kingdom of Rosas, where Asha, a sharp-witted idealist, makes a wish so powerful that it is answered by a cosmic force – a little ball of boundless energy called Star. Together, Asha and Star confront a most formidable foe – the ruler of Rosas, King Magnifico – to save her community and prove that when the will of one courageous human connects with the magic of the stars, wondrous things can happen. Featuring the voices of Academy Award®-winning actress Ariana DeBose as Asha, Chris Pine as King Magnifico, and Alan Tudyk as Asha’s pet goat Valentino, the epic animated musical _Wish_  hits the big screen as the storied studio marks 100 years of moviemaking.

Inspired by Walt Disney’s magical, musical legacy, the movie features an original story and characters, with seven all-new songs penned by Grammy®-nominated singer-songwriter Julia Michaels and Grammy-winning producer-songwriter-musician Benjamin Rice. But perhaps this film’s biggest nod to the Disney legacy is in the title itself: _Wish_. Whether it’s Geppetto looking up at the stars and wishing for his wooden Pinocchio to become a real boy, Tiana gazing at the night sky as she dreams of owning her own business, or Moana turning to the stars in her quest to save her island, so many of Disney’s most beloved characters are defined by their dreams. _Wish_ celebrates that kind of passion. ‘At the heart of our film is this: “There is no greater power in the universe than someone with a true wish in their heart”,’ says the film’s screenwriter-executive producer Jennifer Lee (_Frozen_,  _Frozen 2_), who also serves as the studio’s chief creative officer. ‘It really is a film about understanding that with great wishes often comes greater struggle. Hopefully, it’s aspirational on how to persevere.’  
**Production notes**  
<br>
<![endif]-->

**Wish**

_Directed by_: Chris Buck, Fawn Veerasunthorn  
_©_: Inc. Disney Enterprises  
_Production Company_: Disney  
_Created and Produced at_:

Walt Disney Animation Studios  
_Executive Producers_: Jennifer Lee, Don Hall  
_Produced by_: Peter Del Vecho,

Juan Pablo Reyes Lancaster-Jones  
_Screenplay by_: Jennifer Lee, Allison Moore  
_Additional Story Material by_:

Carlos López Estrada, Andrew Rothschild  
_Story by_: Jennifer Lee, Chris Buck,

Fawn Veerasunthorn, Allison Moore  
_Director of Cinematography Layout_: Rob Dressel  
_Director of Cinematography Lighting_:

Adolph Lusinsky  
_Heads of Animation_: Rebecca Wilson Bresee, Wayne Unten  
_Edited by_: Jeff Draheim  
_Production Designer_: Michael Giaimo,

Lisa Keene, David Womersley  
_Original Songs by_: Julia Michaels, Benjamin Rice  
_Original Score Composed by_: Dave Metzger  
_Score Choir_: London Voices  
_Orchestra Conducted by_: Don Harper  
_Sound Designer_: Nia Hansen
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMjUzNzE4MjUyXX0=
-->