
Skolimowski’s alter ego Andrzej Leszczyc returns for a final bow as one of five thirtysomething former colleagues whose reunion, taking place in an abandoned railway wagon, becomes a sombre reflection on both Poland’s past and possible future. It proved too near the knuckle for the communist authorities, who not only banned it but effectively sent its director into a lengthy exile.

**Jerzy Skolimowski on ‘Hands Up!’**  
_Hands Up!_ is by far my best film. Everyone who has seen it says so. I had complete freedom to make it exactly as I wanted. Nobody saw the rushes and nobody tried to force anything upon me. Consequently I was astonished when it was banned, but I still hope it will be released in the uncut version. It is a very ambitious film which will be understood differently in Poland and abroad. It is a provocation about political and social problems in Poland: a black film, not very explicit, with lots of allusions. The story line is realistic and non-realistic at the same time, but difficult to talk about. It is a kind of trip in the imagination.

We meet an anonymous man who could be any of us. We start to examine his appearance – he has nice glasses, a valuable ring and a developing paunch. He is approximately 35 years old and graduated in medicine ten years ago. Then we take a look at the inside. What has he done with the best ten years of his life? He has lost them. He has lost all the ideals he had when he was a young student. The more established he has become, the more he has lost. His life consists of all the unimportant things surrounding him, and which he constantly replaces to achieve a kind of variation. He gets new cars, new houses, new wives. He is obsessed by owning things, not on a large scale like an American millionaire but on a small one. And this is typical of the generation he belongs to in Poland: the big ideas have been replaced by the little things.

Ten years ago we were young in Poland. We were making a revolution, we fought Stalinism, and we believed in the future. People were fantastic at that time. We wanted to create something artistically, scientifically, politically.  The world was open to us and we wanted to conquer it. But the older we have become, the smaller the world. Where are the ideas and the rage to live? _Hands Up!_ deals with these problems as well as other moral and political questions in Poland. Maybe that is why the censors are mixed up and are delaying its release. The film is both an accusation and an explanation of why it has become like this. It is at one and the same time a conclusion and an outcry. I suppose this sounds pretentious, but the film itself doesn’t seem pretentious, that is why I can take the liberty of talking pretentiously about it.

The leading character in _Hands Up!_ undertakes a train journey, not in an ordinary compartment but in a cattle truck. This is one of many metaphors in the film. He is travelling in a truck which is normally used only for cattle, and which was also used for the transportation of prisoners to the concentration camps during the war. If this happened 25 years ago and we were our parents, we had to fight for our lives. But today we don’t fight any more, today we have this horrible lack of passion and engagement. The fact that this man is a doctor is another metaphor. His medical training enables him to cure people physically, but they also need mental care. How can he treat other people for diseases from which he is suffering himself?

If I were to represent _Hands Up!_ graphically, there would be very vehement and vigorous oscillations in the pattern, interrupted every now and then by soft and gentle wavy lines. People argue and quarrel a lot, and the points of view are brought up sharply against each other – not in _cinéma vérité_ style, for I work in the very opposite way, although I too am a realist. The discussions tear along like a boxing match, and suddenly the film becomes quiet for a few moments, tender and lyric scenes with quiet music before the fight goes on. It is my best and most mature film, and it is not funny at all.  
**Jerzy Skolimowski in conversation with Christian Braad Thomsen, _Sight and Sound_, Summer 1968**
<br><br>

**HANDS UP! (RĘCE DO GORY)**

_Director_: Jerzy Skolimowski  
_Production Companies_: Film Polski,  
Zespól Filmowy ‘Syrena’

_Written by:_ Jerzy Skolimowski, Andrzej Kostenko  
_Director of Photography_: Witold Sobocinski

_Editors:_ Jadwiga Ignatczenko, Grazyna Jasinska, Zenon Piórecki  
_Original Music_: Krzysztof Komeda  
_Music_: Krzysztof Penderecki, Józef Skrzek

_Cast:_

Jerzy Skolimowski _(Andrzej Leszczyc)_

Tadeusz Lomnicki _(Opel Record)_  
Joanna Szcerbic _(Alfa)_  
Adam Hanuszkiewicz _(Romeo)_  
Bogumil Kobiela _(Wartburg)_

_1981 footage_

Alan Bates

Jane Asher

David Essex

Bruno Ganz

Karol Kulik

Michael Sarne

Volker Schlöndorff

Margarethe von Trotta

Fred Zinnemann

Poland 1967/1981

80 mins
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTE4MTg3Njk1Nl19
-->