---
layout: post
title: In Celebration
published: true
date: 2024-05-08
readtime: true
categories: ['O DREAMLAND!<br>LINDSAY ANDERSON’S DARK BRITISH CINEMA']
tags: [Drama]
metadata: 'UK 1968, 111 mins<br> Director: Lindsay Anderson'
pdf: '2024-05-06-if.pdf'
---

David Storey’s play _In Celebration_ opened at the Royal Court Theatre in London on 22 April 1969, and earned rave reviews in its premiere engagement in the United States at the Arena Stage Theatre, Washington, DC. It is the story of three sons, educated above their class, who return to their home in a coal-mining town in the north of England to celebrate their parents’ 40th wedding anniversary. It’s a sharply etched, deeply compassionate portrait of a family reunion fatally flawed by the spectres of past guilt and present hypocrisy. Storey powerfully delves beneath the surface appearance of love and unity to reveal the diverse forces that have alienated the sons from the parents.

Storey says that _In Celebration_ is his most autobiographical work. ‘My father Frank had worked in the mines since he was a boy – a short man in a dark countryside of slag heaps and polluted rivers. He was the son of a miner but he’d taught himself things like algebra. And he was very keen that we boys – there were four of us but one died of privation (as in the play) – should get out and have good middle-class lives. But I was confused as to what he did want. There was this chap down the street, who was becoming middle class, had an office job, a bowler and a little motor, the symbol of the middle class. Every time my father saw that man get in his car and drive past, he would emit the most violent sounds of rage and derision. I felt my father was educating me for a part of society he really despised.’

David Storey and Lindsay Anderson have known each other for over 15 years. ‘I share David’s way of looking at the world,’ says Anderson, and Storey states that he and the director enjoy ‘an unspoken intuition.’ The film was shot at EMI Studios and on location at the Bestwood Colliery village and at Langwith Colliery in Yorkshire where Storey was born and grew up. Prior to filming, the cast and the director spent three weeks in rehearsal despite their strong familiarity with the roles. This was because ‘there is a tremendous difference between staging a play and presenting it as a film,’ according to Anderson. ‘The stage gives the audience a broader aspect of a scene than film and therefore the rehearsals are more valid for me as a director perhaps, than they are possibly for the actors.’

Anderson and his cast were old friends having worked together on the original stage production of _In Celebration_ and in other works by Storey, thus there was a strong feeling of unity on the set. The mood at times approached that of a college reunion. In fact the laughter, and joking of the cast, particularly of Alan Bates, James Bolam and Brian Cox, had to be kept firmly under control with schoolmasterish rebukes from Anderson. Within any given hour during the shooting, Bates would be reprimanded for giggling, Bolam for not concentrating and Cox for being out of position. The dialogue went something like this: ‘Alan pull yourself together and do it again – properly this time… Jimmy you haven’t remembered what I said – now once again… Brian, what are you doing there? You should be over here – march… Come along, come along everyone – concentrate – we are going to do it all again – now – just see if you can get it right!’ Needless to say everything was given and accepted in good humour. ‘If I didn’t stop them fooling around,’ says Anderson, ‘we would never have got anything done. We all knew each other so well that I had to take a firm line with them.’  
**_In Celebration_ production notes**

**Lindsay Anderson on ‘In Celebration’**  
‘The advantage of the cinema over the theatre is not that you can even have horses, but that you can stare closer into a man’s eyes.’ (Grigori Kosintsev, _King Lear: The Space of Tragedy_)

When I was invited to direct a film version of _In Celebration_ for the American Film Theatre series, I didn’t fully appreciate the truth of Kosintsev’s dictum. Like many people, I was over-inclined to associate ‘movement’ in the Movies with external action, montage, spectacular effects, widespread locations. I was apprehensive too, at the idea of filming long dialogue scenes and of having to keep them visually and cinematically alive. In my films up to that time, I had rarely needed to deal with sustained passages of dialogue, and I wasn’t absolutely confident in my capacity to do it. However, the film was going to be made whether I directed it or not and I certainly was not going to let anybody else do it. _In Celebration_ was the first of David Storey’s plays that I had the pleasure of directing, and we had managed to get together what I felt to be the perfect cast. _In Celebration_ had run extremely successfully at the Royal Court, but it had never transferred to the West End – unlike its successors, _The Contractor_, _Home_, _The Changing Room_, _The Farm_ and _Life Class_.  

Here was another reason why, in spite of my apprehensions, I felt it was not just worthwhile but important to bring the play and that particular performance to a much wider audience. And the final inducement was the fact that, by some miracle, all of the original cast were available to play the roles which they had created at the Royal Court in 1969.

The aim of the American Film Theatre series was, in my opinion, both original and valid. It was not simply to record, television-fashion, stage productions of noteworthy plays. Nor was it to render ‘filmic’ by the conventional means of expansion and rewriting, material which had been conceived for the stage. It was rather to have things both ways – always a difficult thing to do, but always desirable. That is to say, the intention was to preserve the original theatrical text as fully as possible, and to film them with the kind of care and attention and concentration which would enable them to live on the screen in a new way, and to take advantage of everything that the film camera has to offer in the way of penetration, analysis and empathy. The theatrical experience, in spite of the presence of the actor before the audience, is almost bound to be an objective one. You have five or six people sitting talking on a stage: it is tremendously difficult for a director to ensure that the audience will be looking at any moment precisely where he wants them to look, registering exactly that subtlety of feeling or relationship which he feels to be most important. When you have a character like Steven in _In Celebration_, this problem is particularly acute. For Steven is silent for long periods of the play, yet much of the situation needs to be related to his temperament and his intuition. At many points his reactions are all-important, yet he seldom moves and seldom speaks. Here is a case, if ever there was one, where the ability of a camera to ‘stare closer into a man’s eyes’ helps immeasurably the task of the actor and of the director.  
The cast had all first created their roles five years before. They had created them with a wonderful spirit of ensemble and enjoyment, both of the play and of each other’s playing. To return to the same characters and the same relationships five years later, was to experience a deepening and maturing of understanding, which I believe results in one of the finest examples of ensemble playing to be preserved anywhere on film.  
**Lindsay Anderson**  
<br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEyNjAxMTY5ODZdfQ==
-->