
Pasolini’s hopes, energies and talent were focused on resistance to the sameness of culture, to the homogenising, consumerist demands of capital, its creation of (false) desires and the politico-social instruments for their establishment. Throughout the 1970s, until his death, he railed against any hint of accommodation and reserved his most violent and outrageous remarks for the tolerance offered by Italian society as its means for greater social integration rather than, in his terms, genuine freedom. At the core of Pasolini’s resistance, particularly in his films, was the body, sexuality, violence, physicality. It was on the basis of the body that he sought his actors, the way figures smiled, moved, danced, shouted. It was their (sacred) beauty and thereby their opposition in their very being to the institutionalised. Alas, such beauty is always ephemeral; not even analogy can save it.

It was the young and their sexuality that Pasolini had idealised, particularly in the case of his _Trilogia della vita_ in the early 1970s which immediately preceded _Salò_. But there was a problem.

The institutionalisations and repressions he decried were too powerful. It was as if the youth, sex, rather than resisting, had capitulated to a tolerance and liberality that absorbed it, not only changing character but characteristics, features and bodies. _Salò_ is not only the story of that capitulation but a punishment for it. Pasolini was like an angry disappointed father chastising his children, while the horrors committed by the libertines on the young in the film were analogies of what was already current for Pasolini in present-day Italy. The libertines were, in more ways than one, his instruments, even his joy. Power, for him, had usurped sexuality, had destroyed the last bastion of difference and defence, the very difference out of which poetry could be made; hence the equation-analogy of reality and language that he entertained. It had reduced the irreducible.

The scandal of _Salò_ resides less in its representations of torture and perversity than in the perversity of the film whose visual beauty frames horrors with such care and in such a manner as to make the film, in its meticulousness and precision framing, analogous to the rules, order and inescapable power exercised by the libertines. There is too the scandal of his impossible, inappropriate analogies: de Sade, fascism, present-day capitalism and Dante, equated, hypothetical, hyperbolic comparisons, untenable and in being so, impossible to accommodate and, in certain scenes of _Salò_, to witness and accept.  
**Sam Rohdie, _Salò or The 120 Days of Sodom,_ BFI DVD booklet**

It is, perhaps, Pasolini’s most enduring legacy, as a Marxist maverick distrusted by the mainstream Left and loathed by the Right, to have stirred up ideological complacencies of whatever order and rehabilitated, in the context of progressive bourgeois democracies, the whole notion of scandal as secular blasphemy. For the critic, the particular ‘scandal’ of his last film might well be its virtual unreviewability: _Salò_, in an absolutely literal sense defies criticism. Its chapter-like structure is strong but unsubtle, there is no real narrative development and no ‘performance’ to speak of.

Visually, _Salò_ consists of a series of ritualised tableaux framed by the décor of the villa in which the orgies take place. But the use to which Pasolini puts some of the most seductively evocative textures of the recent past – Bauhaus furniture, paintings by Léger and Feininger, dance-band music and Ezra Pound on the radio – bears no relation to the decorative, ‘thirties-as-wallpaper aesthetic’ of, say, Bertolucci’s _The Conformist_. Here it is impossible to indulge in selective nostalgia. By placing a naked young girl eating her tormentor’s warm excrement in front of the Léger, Pasolini in no way ‘romanticises’ the act; rather, he defaces the mural, as violently as, for its time, Duchamp’s painted moustache defaced the Mona Lisa. He subverts a work of art that was itself once scandalous before becoming respectable museum fodder. And even if it were not justified by _Les 120 journées de Sodome_, only excrement could serve this purpose, being the original element of that metaphorical transference that produces graffiti, slogans painted on walls, etc.

For _Salò_, perhaps the most successful representation of physical cruelty in the history of the cinema, is also one of the least metaphorical of films. To understand why, it is necessary to raise the question of infidelity to Sade’s text (so disturbing to French critics, in particular). Despite the (no doubt, consciously) provocative bibliography that figures with such prominence in the film’s credits, citing Barthes, Blanchot and Klossowski, it would seem unarguable that, when he turned Sade’s protagonists into Fascist monsters Pasolini was betraying the anarchic spirit of _Les 120 journées_. But, apart from the fact that, by availing himself of the novel’s form without endorsing its philosophical substructure, he was only following Sade’s example (from Dante and Boccaccio), there is a sense in which _Salò_ is a truly Sadean film. In numerous interviews, Pasolini referred to its subject as ‘the treatment of human beings as objects’, presumably in as much a political as a purely sexual context. But, given the material he was shooting, he was certainly aware that his film risked being a huge _succès de scandale_ and that crowds do not flock to see political allegories.

Any film containing explicitly sexual scenes is a pornographic film, for that is how it will be consumed. In effect, the film could not but reflect the conditions of its own fabrication, which become the real Sadean text. P.P.P., dandy (in the Baudelairean sense), cinéaste and homosexual, encloses himself and his crew for 52 days in an isolated villa (studio interiors) with 16 beautiful young men and women, on whom he inflicts humiliations less appalling, certainly, than those depicted in the film – the excrement, we are told, was a compound of chocolate and dry biscuit – but humiliations nevertheless, magnified by the cinema as by a giant two-way mirror. What else is one young girl’s disappointment on being rejected, as a victim, but the reflection of so many heartbreaks at casting sessions that must have been organised like the preliminary heats of a beauty contest?

Critics tend to shy away from the material conditions of filmmaking, never asking themselves what happens afterwards to the grotesques that haunt Fellini’s fantasies or the languid youths who grace Visconti’s salons. The only true anarchy – as one of the characters in _Salò_, quoting Sade, remarks – is the anarchy of power. Pasolini’s last film is disturbing not because of what it shows, but because of what it is.  
**Gilbert Adair, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, September 1979**
<br><br>

**SALÒ OR THE 120 DAYS OF SODOM**<br>

**(SALÒ O LE 120 GIORNATE DI SODOMA)**<br>

_Director_: Pier Paolo Pasolini<br>

_Production Company_:

P.E.A. – Produzioni Europee Associate,

Les Productions Artistes Associés

_Producer_: Alberto Grimaldi<br>

_Unit Managers:_ Alessandro Mattei, Renzo David, Angelo Zemella<br>

_Production Manager_: Antonio Girasante

_Production Supervisor_: Alberto De Stefanis

_Post-production Supervisor_: Enzo Ocone

_1st Assistant Director_: Umberto Angelucci

_2nd Assistant Director_: Fiorella Infascelli

_Continuity_: Beatrice Banfi

_Screenplay_: Pier Paolo Pasolini

_Script Collaborator_: Sergio Citti

_Based on the novel by_:

Donatien Alphonse François de Sade

_Director of Photography_: Tonino Delli Colli

_Camera Operators_: Carlo Tafani, Emilio Bestetti

_1st Assistant Cameraman_: Sandro Battaglia

_2nd Assistant Cameraman_: Giancarlo Granatelli

_Editor_: Nino Baragli

_1st Assistant Editor_: Ugo De Rossi

_2nd Assistant Editor_: Alfredo Menchini

_Art Director_: Dante Ferretti

_Set Dresser_: Osvaldo Desideri

_Costumes_: Danilo Donati

_Assistant Costumes_: Vanni Castellani

_Costumes Created by_: Farani

_Make-up_: Alfredo Tiberi

_Special Make-up Effects_: Rocchetti-Carboni

_Hair_: Giuseppina Bovino

_Wigs_: Rocchetti-Carboni

_Music played on the pianoforte by_:

Arnaldo Graziosi

_Music Publisher_: Eureka

_Music Consultant_: Ennio Morricone

_Sound_: Domenico Pasquadisceglie,

Giorgio Loviscek

_Boom Operator_: Giuseppina Sagliano

_Mixer_: Fausto Ancillai

_Sound Effects_: Luciano Anzellotti

_Post-synchronisation_:

International Recording Studios (Rome)

_Set Furnishings/Drapes_: D’Angelo

_Crystal_: D.O.M.

_Porcelain_: Richard – Ginori

_Unit Publicity_: Nico Naldini

_Cast:_

Paolo Bonacelli _(the duke)_

Giorgio Cataldi _(the bishop)_

Uberto P. Quintavalle _(chief magistrate)_

Aldo Valletti _(the president)_

Caterina Boratto _(Signora Castelli)_

Elsa De Giorgi _(Signora Maggi)_

Hélène Surgère _(Signora Vaccari)_

Sonia Saviange _(the piano virtuoso)_

Sergio Fascetti_,_ Bruno Musso, Antonio Orlando_,_ Claudio Cicchetti, Franco Merli,

Umberto Chessari, Lamberto Book,

Gaspare Di Jenno _(masked victims)_

Giuliana Melis, Faridah Malik,

Graziella Aniceto, Renata Moar_,_ Dorit Henke_,_ Antinisca Nemour, Benedetta Gaetani,

Olga Andreis _(female victims)_

Tatiana Mogilansky, Susanna Radaelli_,_ Giuliana Orlandi, Liana Acquaviva

_(young women)_

Rinaldo Missaglia, Giuseppe Patruno_,_

Guido Galletti, Efisio Etzi _(young soldiers)_

Claudio Troccoli, Fabrizio Menichini,

Maurizio Valaguzza, Ezio Manni _(collaborators)_

Paola Pieracci, Carla Terlizzi,

Anna Maria Dossena, Anna Recchimuzzi,

Ines Pellegrini _(procuresses/servants)_

Marco Bellocchio _(dubbed voice of the president) *_

Laura Betti _(dubbed voice of Signora Vaccari) *_

Michel Piccoli _(voice of the duke, French version) *_

Italy-France 1975

117 mins

35mm

* Uncredited

The screening on Tue 9 Jan will be introduced by season curator Jason Wood
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbOTczMTU0ODM0XX0=
-->