
John Pilger believed passionately that great documentaries frighten the powerful, unnerve the compliant and expose the hypocritical. Across a long career, Pilger was called a ‘dangerous subversive’ for dissenting from the ‘official’ version of events. His work constantly asks us to think, question, speak out – and take action.Author Anthony Hayward (_In the Name of Justice: The Television Reporting of John Pilger_) will present an illustrated career overview of the documentary filmmaker, journalist and author, who died last year. This will be followed by a panel discussion with special guests film director  Ken Loach, Christopher Hird of Dartmouth Films, Richard Creasey, former head of documentaries at ATV and Central Independent Television and author and journalist Victoria Brittain, who will discuss the global influence of John Pilger’s work and his  rich legacy.  
<br>

**About John Pilger**  
John Pilger was born and grew up in Bondi, Sydney, Australia. He launched his first newspaper at Sydney High School and later completed a four-year cadetship with Australian Consolidated Press. ‘It was one of the strictest language courses I know,’ he said. ‘Devised by a celebrated, literate editor, Brian Penton, the aim was economy of language and accuracy. It certainly taught me to admire writing that was spare, precise and free of clichés, that didn’t retreat into the passive voice and used adjectives only when absolutely necessary. I have long since slipped that leash, but those early disciplines helped shape my journalism and writing and my understanding of moving and still pictures.’

Like many of his Australian generation, Pilger and two colleagues left for Europe in the early 1960s. They set up an ill-fated freelance ‘agency’ in Italy (with the grand title of ‘Interep’) and quickly went broke. Arriving in London, Pilger freelanced, then joined Reuters, moving to the London _Daily Mirror_, Britain’s biggest selling newspaper, which was then changing to a serious tabloid.

He became chief foreign correspondent and reported from all over the world, covering numerous wars, notably Vietnam. Still in his twenties, he became the youngest journalist to receive Britain’s highest award for journalism, _Journalist of the Year_ and was the first to win it twice. Moving to the United States, he reported the upheavals there in the late 1960s and 1970s. He marched with America’s poor from Alabama to Washington, following the assassination of Martin Luther King. He was in the same room when Robert Kennedy, the presidential candidate, was assassinated in June 1968.

His work in South East Asia produced an iconic issue of the _London Mirror_, devoted almost entirely to his world exclusive dispatches from Cambodia in the aftermath of Pol Pot’s reign. The combined impact of his _Mirror_ reports and his subsequent documentary, _Year Zero: the Silent Death of Cambodia_, raised almost $50 million for the people of that stricken country. Similarly, his 1994 documentary and dispatches report from East Timor, where he travelled under cover, helped galvanise support for the East Timorese, then occupied by Indonesia.

In Britain, his four-year investigation on behalf of a group of children damaged at birth by the drug Thalidomide, and left out of the settlement with the drugs company, resulted in a special settlement.

His numerous documentaries on Australia, notably _The Secret Country_ (1983), the bicentary trilogy _The Last Dream_ (1988), _Welcome to Australia_ (1999) and _Utopia_ (2013) all celebrated and revealed much of his own country’s ‘forgotten past’, especially its Indigenous past and present.

He won an American TV Academy Award, an Emmy, and a British Academy Award, a BAFTA for his documentaries, which also won numerous US and European awards, such as as the Royal Television Society’s Best Documentary. The BFI includes his 1979 film, _Year Zero: the Silent Death of Cambodia_ among the ten most important documentaries of the twentieth century.

His articles appeared worldwide. In 2001, he curated a major exhibition at the London Barbican, _Reporting the World: John Pilger’s Eyewitness Photographers_, a tribute to the great black-and-white photographers he worked alongside. In 2003, he was awarded the prestigious Sophie Prize for ’30 years of exposing injustice and promoting human rights’. In 2009, he was awarded Australia’s human rights prize, the Sydney Peace Prize. He received honorary doctorates from universities in the UK and abroad. In 2017, the British Library announced a John Pilger Archive of all his written and filmed work.  
**johnpilger.com**
<br><br>

**Victoria Brittain**  began working in 1968 in Washington, freelance for _The Times_ and the _New Statesman_, then took herself to Vietnam, where she continued to work for _The Times_. She lived and worked in Algiers and Nairobi for seven years and became _The Guardian_ correspondent. She worked for the paper for 25 years and became Associate Foreign Editor. She reported widely in Africa, and from Gaza and the West Bank, as well as Cuba and Grenada. She worked for many other media, including _Le Monde Diplomatique,_ _Afrique/Asie,Political Quarterly_, and currently _Afrique XX1._ She also wrote books on the Cold War in Africa, notably Angola; the US ‘war on terror’, focusing on Guantanamo as co-author of Moazzam Begg’s _Enemy Combatant,_ and _Shadow Lives, the Forgotten Women of the war of Terror;_ most recently _Love and Resistance in the Films of Mai Masri_ on the Palestinian filmmaker’s work.

**Richard Creasey**  was Central Television’s longest-serving programme controller. For 14 years, he ran the Factual Programme Department and was responsible for the company’s features and documentary output. During this time, Richard co-founded the Television Trust for Environment (TVE). He chaired TVE from 2002 to 2015 and is now an Emeritus Chair. Richard is a Life Member of the British Academy of Film and Television Arts  (BAFTA). Richard was also the founder and editor-in-chief of _The Digital Village_, formed by a group of leading thinkers and doers from the online, television, and literary worlds, including the late Douglas Adams. Richard’s first book, _Eternity’s Sunrise_, sprang from his determination to join the Crime Writer’s Association (CWA), founded by his father, John Creasey, who wrote 600 books following 742 rejections. _Eternity’s Sunrise_ was published by Endeavour Press in 2007. Richard has published three more books and is now writing multimedia graphic novels.

**Christopher Hird** is the founder and managing director of Dartmouth Films (www.dartmouthfilms.com), which has pioneered new ways of funding, producing and distributing documentaries in the UK. A former investment analyst in the City, he worked as a journalist on the _Economist_, _Daily Mail_, _New Statesman_ and _Sunday Times_, where he was the editor of Insight. He then became a TV reporter for Channel 4 and the BBC and co-founded one of the UK’s first independent production companies – Fulcrum TV – before starting Dartmouth Films, who produced and distributed the last four of John Pilger’s films – releasing them in cinemas before their transmission on ITV. He is a patron of the Grierson Trust, Index on Censorship and the London Film School and a trustee of the Theatre Royal Stratford East and the Wincott Foundation.

**Ken Loach** was born in 1936 in Nuneaton. He attended King Edward VI Grammar School and went on to study law at St. Peter’s Hall, Oxford. After a brief spell in the theatre, Loach was recruited by the BBC in 1963 as a television director. This launched a long career directing films for television and the cinema, from _Cathy Come Home_ and _Kes_ in the sixties to _Land and Freedom, Sweet Sixteen, The Wind That Shakes the Barley_ (Palme d’Or, Cannes Film Festival 2006), _Looking for Eric, The Angels’ Share_ and _I, Daniel Blake_ (Palme d’Or, Cannes Film Festival 2016). If he’s not bothering people about their yawning or their chosen shade of off white paint, he’s likely on the Twerton Park terraces yelling at his beloved Bath City Football Club.

**Host: Anthony Hayward** is a journalist and author specialising in television and film. A regular contributor to _The Guardian_, he has written the books _Phantom: Michael Crawford Unmasked_, _Julie Christie_ and _Which Side Are You On?: Ken Loach and His Films_. In 2013, he updated _In the Name of Justice: The Television Reporting of John Pilger_, originally published by Bloomsbury, as the e-book _Breaking the Silence: The Films of John Pilger_, available through Amazon.
<br><br>


<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNjg5NzExNjc1XX0=
-->