
At one point in Alice Rohrwacher’s _La chimera_, Josh O’Connor’s brooding English grave-robber grips a makeshift divining rod with both hands and slowly, reverently, walks through the local Tuscan wood, both actively seeking inspiration and submitting himself to its vagaries. It could almost be a metaphor for O’Connor’s approach to role selection: it’s hard to predict where he’ll go next, or to discern what exactly attracts him to the parts he chooses, but he has a knack for striking gold – a gruff Yorkshire farmer in Francis Lee’s indie drama _God’s Own Country_ (2017), Prince Charles in the third and fourth seasons of _The Crown_ (2019-20), an American tennis pro slugging it out against his former best friend in Luca Guadagnino’s deft, delirious _Challengers_.

After seeing _Happy as Lazzaro_, O’Connor knew he wanted to work with Rohrwacher but was told by his agent, ‘Get in line. And good luck trying to get in touch with her – she lives on the side of a hill.’ Fan letters he sent never reached her but after seeing _God’s Own Country_ Rohrwacher contacted O’Connor and ended up reimagining the _tombarolo_ role (originally intended for an older actor) around him.

Over a drink at a bar in Soho, O’Connor describes how he was intrigued during their first meeting when Rohrwacher asked him: ‘“If we were to cut the world in half and take a cross-section of it, what would each generation have left behind?” The Greek temples, the Etruscan treasures, shells from the wars. Then plastic was invented. I’m not sure what the 60s would have left – maybe acid tabs? What are we leaving behind now – vapes and electric toothbrushes? The Etruscans buried themselves with their worldly possessions, and that’s what they cherished.’

_Which other directors have received Josh O’Connor fan letters?_

Josh O’Connor: When I was 17, I read this book by Paul Auster called _Mr. Vertigo_ [1994]. I still think someone somewhere should make a movie of it. As I was reading it, I was like, ‘Oh my goodness, if Tim Burton had his hands on this movie…’ So at 17 years old, I wrote a letter to Tim Burton saying, ‘You should read this book and make it into a film.’ I was like, ‘There’s a part for Helena Bonham Carter, there’s a part for Johnny Depp.’ And then there was this one boy, the main boy – who could that be?

_How did you immerse yourself in the role of Arthur the tombarolo?_

We’d just come out of lockdown. I was living in New York, feeling very homesick, a little displaced. My grandmother had passed away and I was struggling with that, trying to comprehend how to exist in a world that is missing a part of itself. That’s what Arthur’s about. He’s trying to understand how to feel the void, how to join his fiancée who passed away.

In terms of learning the language, I was in New York and spent three months with [the language training company] Berlitz. You arrive at the studio and from 8am until 6pm you speak only Italian, and the tutor speaks to you only in Italian. Which was brilliant but hard. One of the big discoveries when I got to Italy was that when the plumbers, electricians and non-professional actors that Alice hires from her village were suddenly talking to me, I was like, ‘Lads, I don’t know what you’re saying.’ Even though I’d been speaking in Italian for three months. So then you pick up the dialect. It was such a joy.

_Several characters in the film, including Arthur, look remarkably Etruscan._

Yeah. There’s that early scene where I’m talking about that girl on the train, saying that she has a very Etruscan nose. I remember I did this movement [traces his finger from the middle of his forehead down to the tip of his nose], and Alice said, ‘Josh, don’t highlight your nose – it makes you look very Etruscan. It sounds like you’re talking about yourself.’ But I did it anyway. Also, my costume, which deteriorates throughout the film, seemed like it was becoming part of the ground. I lost lots of weight and I grew a beard. I feel like I did become this Etruscan relic.

Also, I was living in my camper van, so most of the time I stank. I was washing myself in Lake Bolsena. It was absolute bliss. People often misconstrue [this] as some sort of Method acting. It wasn’t, it was like a fucking holiday. I loved it. It was an excuse to be dirty and filthy all the time.

_Did you meet any tombaroli?_

It’s so illegal I can’t say who they are, but there are real _tombaroli_ in the film.  
So there you go. See if you can figure out which ones!

The _tombaroli_ are normal people. What Alice is really interested in, and what I’m really interested in, is how our attitudes have changed over time. We can’t find any evidence that Etruscans built homes to live in, but they built tombs. It’s like they didn’t build anything to live comfortably in, but they did build stuff to die comfortably in. And I always found that very interesting. For them, the afterlife, the stuff you can’t see, held more importance than what we exist in now. We’re so far from that today.

_You’ve just worked with Rohrwacher and Guadagnino. Is there something that draws you to Italian filmmakers?_

Well, Luca is a fantastic director, Alice is a fantastic director, so in some ways it’s just a coincidence. But I’ve always been a big fan of Italian film. _Accattone_ [Pier Paolo Pasolini, 1961] and _The Flowers of St. Francis_ [Roberto Rossellini, 1950] are two of my favourite movies.

But also, it’s the way the Italians make films. I sometimes wonder: what if we had an Alice Rohrwacher? She spends six months shooting, on film, with a huge cast of professional and non-professional actors and an entire crew she’s got to keep available for half a year. That’s expensive. And the Italian film industry backs her fully, time after time. I don’t know if we would do that here or in America.

_Did you watch any films in preparation for La chimera and Challengers?_

I rewatched _Accattone_ for _La chimera_. I felt that the way Accattone holds himself was quite Arthur-esque, or vice versa. Alice sent me a homemade book with over 200 films to watch. At the time I was like, ‘I’m gonna watch every one,’ but obviously I couldn’t. I am making my way through them, though. There’s all sorts in there. With _Challengers_, it was more straightforward; I knew what I was doing. _The Social Network_ [2011] and _Superbad_ [2007] were two films I drew on. But beyond that, nothing.

_The roles you take on are so diverse. Do you think there’s a single thing that unites all your characters?_

I don’t think so. People have asked me, ‘What are you trying to figure out about the fragile nature of masculinity?’ And for a while I thought, ‘Oh, that’s what’s leading me to all these roles. I’m trying to figure out what the male problem is.’ But I don’t think that’s true.

It’s been really funny having _La chimera_ and _Challengers_ come out at the same time. These two roles could not be further apart. Though there are some similarities. I think they both have a bit of anger in them.

The way I see characters, particularly after having played them, is like I leave a little bit with them at the end of each project, and a little bit of them stays with me. So I’ve got this collection of souls that I care very deeply about, but I can’t really group them together.

**Article and interview by Arjun Sajip, _Sight and Sound_, June 2024

<![endif]-->

**LA CHIMERA**

_Directed by_: Alice Rohrwacher  
©: Tempesta SRL, Ad Vitam Production,  
Amka Films Productions, Arte France Cinéma  
_A_ Tempesta, Carlo Cresto-Dina, Rai Cinema _production_  
_In co-production with_: Ad Vitam Production,  
Amka Films Productions, RSI Radiotelevisione svizzera, SRG SSR, Arte France Cinéma  
_With the participation of_: Arte France,  
Canal+, Cine+  
_In association with_: TRT-Sinema  
_With the support of_: Ufficio federale della cultura, Direzione Generale Cinema e Audiovisivo  
_Created with the support of_: Aide aux Cinémas du Monde, Centre national du cinéma et de l’image animée, Institut Français  
_Presented by_: Tempesta, Rai Cinema  
_World Sales_: The Match Factory  
_Executive Producers_: Eli Bush, Jeff Deutchman, Alessio Lazzareschi, Tom Quinn, Michael Weber  
_Produced by_: Carlo Cresto-Dina  
_Produced by - for Rai Cinema_: Paolo Del Brocco  
_Produced by_: Alexandra Henochsberg,  
Pierre-François Piet, Gregory Gajos, Amel Soudani, Michela Pini, Olga Lamontanara  
_Line Producer_: Giorgio Gasparini  
_Associate Producers_: Manuela Melissano,  
Valeria Jamonte  
_Production Manager_: Alessandro Stella  
_Location Manager_: Laura Petruccelli  
_Location Manager (Swiss Unit)_: Marco Parrella  
_Post-production Co-ordinator_: Monica Verzolini  
_1st Assistant Director_: Nicola Scorza  
_Casting Director_: Chiara Polizzi  
_International Casting_: Fiona Weir  
_Written by_: Alice Rohrwacher  
_Story_: Alice Rohrwacher, Pietro Marcello,  
Carmela Covino  
_Story Collaborators_: Maurizio Braucci,  
Sabrina Cusano  
_Script Collaborators_: Carmela Covino,  
Marco Pettenello  
_Director of Photography_: Hélène Louvart  
_Underwater Camera_: Aldo Chessari  
_16mm Camera Operator_: Ilya Sapeha  
_AI VFX Supervisor and Visual Artist_: Fausto Vitali  
_Visual Effects_: Chromatica Visual Effects Roma  
_Special Effects_: Ghost SFX S.R.L.  
_Editor_: Nelly Quettier  
_Assistant Editors_: Shara Spinella, Giorgia Villa  
_Production Designer_: Emita Frigato  
_Art Director_: Elisa Bentivegna  
_Set Decorator_: Rachele Meliadò  
_Set Decorator (Swiss Unit)_: Cécile Grieder  
_Costume Designer_: Loredana Buscemi  
_Make-up_: Esmè Sciaroni  
_Hair_: Daniela Tartari  
_Titles_: Manuel Faticoni  
_Colourist_: Thomas Bouffioulx  
_Choreography_: Valentina Marini  
_Sound Recordist_: Xavier Lavorel  
_Sound Mixer_: Maxence Ciekawy  
_Sound Editor_: Marta Billingsley  
_Sound Ambiance Editor_: Henry Sims  
_Sound Effects Editor_: François Wolf  
_Stunt Co-ordinators_: Emiliano Novelli,  
Michele Russo  
_Acting Coach_: Tatiana Lepore  
_Animal Trainer_: Carolina Basile

_Cast:_

Josh O’Connor _(Arthur)_  
Carol Duarte _(Italia)_  
Vincenzo Nemolato _(Pirro)_  
Lou Roy Lecollinet _(Melodie)_

_the graverobbers_

Giuliano Mantovani _(Jerry)_  
Gian Piero Capretto _(Mario)_  
Melchiorre Pala _(Melchiorre)_  
Ramona Fiorini _(Fabiana)_  
Luca Gargiullo _(the dock worker)_

_the sisters_

Yile Vienello _(Beniamina)_  
Barbara Chiesa _(Nella)_  
Elisabetta Perotto _(Vera)_  
Chiara Pazzaglia _(Rossa)_  
Francesca Carrain _(Sista)_

_the storytellers_

Valentino Santagati _(voice and guitar)_

Piero Crucitti _(triangle and accordion)_

Luciano Vergaro _(Katir)_  
Carlo Tarmati _(policeman)_  
Alba Rohrwacher _(Spartaco)_  
Isabella Rossellini _(Flora)_  
Milutin Dapcevic _(Spalletta)_  
Maria Pia Clementi _(Spartaco’s assistant)_

Italy-France-Switzerland 2023©

131 mins

Digital

A Curzon Film release
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE1ODUxMTM3MjNdfQ==
-->