

Taking its title from the number of films Fellini had completed up to this point, _8½_ features filmmaker Guido (Marcello Mastroianni) being besieged by sycophants and collaborators as he struggles to get started on an unwieldy science-fiction epic. Frequently digressing into surreal and erotic dream sequences, Fellini’s self-reflexive movie about movie-making climaxes with an exuberant parade.

Acclaimed as one the greatest films about artistic expression, _8½_ won two Academy Awards and many festival prizes upon its release, and ranked joint 31st in the 2022 _Sight and Sound_ Great Films of All Time poll.  
**player.bfi.org.uk**  

Back in the 1960s heyday of the pre-video art-house sector, two filmmakers stood as defining poles of the foreign-language art movie – Ingmar Bergman and Federico Fellini. Their qualities complemented and contrasted with each other’s perfectly: Bergman Nordic, serious, austere, locked in a grim struggle with the grey spectre of the Lutheran deity; Fellini exuberant, Mediterranean, expansive, forever poking fun at the wilder excesses of Catholicism. (Although, by strange coincidence, each ended one of his best-known films – _The Seventh Seal_ and _8½_ respectively – with the same image, albeit to startlingly different effect: a chain of people dancing along with hands interlinked.) Neither director now enjoys the critical status he did 40 years ago. But while Bergman remains a respected figure, even if his films are relatively rarely shown these days, Fellini has suffered a crueller fate, widely dismissed as sentimental, overblown and self-indulgent, a filmmaker snared by his own intellectual and aesthetic pretensions.

This isn’t the kind of critical downgrading that regularly follows a creative artist’s death. The process started well within Fellini’s lifetime, indeed almost coincided with the commercial peak of his career. Even at the time of his Oscar-nominated box-office triumphs _La dolce vita_ (1960) and _8½_ (1963) there were disenchanted mutterings that he was losing his way, cutting himself off from the neorealist roots that had so richly nourished him. But if these accusations were justified, the process was entirely deliberate on Fellini’s part: the whole first half of his career can be seen as a determined campaign to break free from the fetters of neo-realism and assert his own vision. With _8½_, the most personal film he had made up to that point, the break was complete.

The central character of _8½_ is film director Guido Anselmi, played by Marcello Mastroianni and presented unmistakably as Fellini’s surrogate. Guido repeatedly finds himself assailed by critics and reporters; the former reproach him for intellectual frivolity while the latter assail him with idiotic questions. ‘Are you for or against divorce?’ yell the press pack. ‘Are you afraid of the atomic bomb? Do you believe in God? Why don’t you make love stories?’

Meanwhile, the most persistent of his critics, his screenwriter Daumier, tells Guido that ‘Your film lacks the qualities of the avant-garde but has all its failings.’ At one point Fellini maliciously has Daumier led away and hanged, but it doesn’t silence him; he returns unharmed to resume the assault. ‘Your tender innocence is completely negative,’ he sneers, ‘your little memories bathed in nostalgia, inoffensive emotional reactions.’ Guido’s only defence is to hide behind disingenuous statements. ‘I wanted to make an honest film,’ he pleads, ‘that would help everyone to bury everything that was dead inside us... I’ve nothing to say – but I want to say it anyway.’

Fellini’s own comments on the film weren’t so very different, similarly appealing to the emotions over the intellect. ‘I don’t like the idea of “understanding” a film,’ he said. ‘I don’t believe that rational understanding is an essential element in the reception of any work of art. Either a film has something to say to you or it hasn’t.  
If you are moved by it, you don’t need to have it explained to you. If not, no explanation can make you moved by it.’

Philip Kemp, _Sight and Sound_, August 2004

**Jonathan Glazer on _8½_**

I was probably 17 or 18 when my dad introduced me to _8½_. This was before I knew precisely what I wanted to do with my life, but the experience of watching it was indelible and extraordinary.

Since I’ve grown up, I’ve realised one of the key things that draws me to the film is that it’s about creative procrastination. That’s probably why so many directors are attracted to it: it’s a perfect mirror. The film is about the choices you commit to or don’t commit to; whether you point the camera in one direction or another; whether you use this actor or that actor. And it’s about all the resonances these choices have.

It’s also an intensely poetic film with a wonderful sensuousness that’s richly intoxicating. Such scenes as the dance the gypsy woman performs for the kids on the beach, or the beautiful sequence where the young boy is being washed – the grandmother is chasing the kid and a huge shadow looms into view and the camera just follows the shadow. The sheer fluidity of the filmmaking is evident too in the scene in the monastery, where the camera pans past austere paintings of clerics – one, two, three, four, five, six, and the seventh is a real man who comes suddenly to life. I also love the way that the fantasy scenes blend with reality in a way that never feels arch. The famous scene in the harem, for instance, where Guido, the film director played by Mastroianni, has all these women fawning over him never comes at you like a dream sequence; it’s presented with its own sense of reality.

When he made _8½_ Felllni was at a point in his career where he was free from certain pressures. After the success of _La dolce vita_ he probably felt he was in a position – commercially and critically – to do the things he wanted. That security gives the film a feeling of liberation: it has an operatic quality yet it’s also quite punk; there’s nothing rigid about the way Felllni tells the story yet it isn’t without structure; it has classical undertones and it’s also effortlessly modem.

These are some of the things I aspire to in my work. _8½_ hasn’t influenced me directly, but I always carry it in my head – and there are very few films I can say that about.  
**Jonathan Glazer talking to Edward Lawrenson. _Sight and Sound_, September 2002**  
<br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTY0MzgwODExM119
-->