
_+ Q&A with director Henry Selick and actor Teri Hatcher_

The story of Coraline Jones and her adventure in the Other World is one that has crossed many avenues of storytelling – father to daughter, pen to paper, book to movie, studio set to 3D screen.

Once upon a time – in the early 1990s – author Neil Gaiman’s daughter Holly was, as he remembers, ‘four or five years old. She used to come home from school and she would see me sitting and writing. She would then clamber up on my knee and dictate little stories to me; these were often about small girls named Holly whose mothers would be kidnapped by evil witches who looked like their mothers.

‘I thought, “Right, I’ll go and find a book like this for her.” I looked, but there wasn’t anything even remotely like that. So I figured I would write that book, and I started to do so.’

Holly Gaiman reflects, ‘_Coraline_ was a story that my Dad read me bits and pieces of when I was a little girl, a story that he had started writing for me and one which nobody else had ever heard or read. It’s a lovely story, one that has both haunted and inspired me since I was a little girl.’

But after completing a few chapters, Neil Gaiman found his career taking off, and it would be another five or six years before he found the time to return to _Coraline_. At which point he ‘suddenly thought, “Holly is getting too old for it.”’

However, she now had a younger sister, Maddy, and Neil Gaiman realised that that if he did not finish the book soon his other daughter would be too old for it as well. With a formal book contract being drawn up, he came up with a plan for productivity: ‘For the next two years, instead of reading in bed before I turned off the light, I would write _Coraline_.’

He began to keep a notebook beside his bed and before he went to sleep he would write 50-100 words, maybe five to six lines each evening. ‘It was a very slow way of writing,’ he admits. ‘That’s about one page every six days. But, doing it every night, eventually, I found myself approaching the end.’ Finally, in 2000, he was able to spend a week finishing the book.

Central to the story is a childhood memory of the author’s; just as children are for a time certain that their toys come to life when they are asleep or not looking, the young Neil Gaiman had his own household suspicions. They were stoked by an old manor house that he was living in with his parents. He recounts, ‘There was a door in a living room that opened onto a brick wall. But I was convinced that it wouldn’t always do that. I tried sneaking up on it; I’d lean against it, as if I was doing something else, and then open it quickly and look. I thought if I could only approach it properly, there would be a corridor behind it. I had a dream that I opened the door and there was a tunnel. In the book, Coraline finds a door that has been bricked up, but one day she goes through the door and there is a corridor.’

The after-school story had become a bedtime one; having finished the book, Neil Gaiman read a chapter each night to Maddy Gaiman before she fell asleep. He admits, ‘If she had been scared or troubled by it, I probably would have put it away. But she loved it.’

During the years of writing _Coraline_ Neil Gaiman followed with interest the feature film work of director and animator Henry Selick; the author had gone to see _The Nightmare before Christmas_ (1993) the first week it was released, and then saw _James and the Giant Peach_ (1996) as well. He remembers, ‘Henry was on my radar as a remarkable creative force. I would talk to my agent and he would say, “There’s this guy Henry Selick; you two would like each other.” So when I finished the _Coraline_ manuscript, I gave it to my agent and asked him to send it to Henry. This was about 18 months before the book was published.’

Selick reflects, ‘When I first read the manuscript, I was struck by the juxtaposition of worlds; the one we all live in, and the one where the grass is always greener. This is something that everyone can relate to. Like Stephen King, Neil sets fantasy in modern times, in our own lives. He splits open ordinary existence and finds magic. _Coraline_ is very appealing to me, and I hope that she will be very appealing to children seeing the movie for a variety of reasons. She’s brave and imaginative and has got an overwhelming curiosity; if she sees something interesting, then she has to know about it. I loved that her “grass is always greener” scenario turns out to be scary. When Coraline – an ordinary girl – faces real evil and triumphs, it really means something, as Neil has said.’

Gaiman says, ‘Within a week, Henry said he wanted to do it. Producer Bill Mechanic – with whom he had worked before – bought the movie rights, and Henry started work on the script immediately. By sheer force of never giving up, Henry has gotten the movie made.’

Selick feels that ‘this was an ideal opportunity to take all I know about storytelling through animation, bringing those tools to bear on a story with a strong lead character. Neil was there with help and advice right from the start, yet was not overly precious with his book and would step away when I needed to focus. You want to honour the important parts of a book in adapting it, but you also have to invent and change as well.’  
**Production notes**
<br>

**Henry Selick on using 3D in ‘Coraline’**

_Was it your idea to use 3D in_ Coraline _?_

Yeah. I know the guy, who died [in 2022]: Lenny Lipton, who pretty much developed the modern 3D projection system. He was a very interesting renaissance guy. He wrote the lyrics to ‘Puff, the Magic Dragon’ [which were adapted for the 1963 hit song by Peter, Paul and Mary] when he was, like, 19 [in 1959]. The money he made from that song over the years… helped to fuel some of his experiments. I did some projects with him and I would check in with him at least once a year to see how [his technology] was coming along. When it looked like _Coraline_ had a chance to get made, he showed me the latest version of it. Of course, what he showed me, with electronic shutter glasses, was beyond what anyone in the theatres had ever seen. He said he’d sold this to a company, RealD, who were going to start putting it into theatres. That was my eureka moment.

Coraline has to go into another world. In the original _Wizard of Oz_ [1939], Dorothy goes into a world of colour, which at that time was a rare thing in feature films. Coraline could go from her flattened, less colourful life into a very expansive, deep world of 3D. It’s not that 3D hadn’t been done in the past, but it was always done as a gimmick – the 1950s sorts of films that gave people headaches, when the technology was weak.

[We] really went overboard in designing the film and the story to go hand in hand with the technique. The sets in the real world were compressed and literally flattened. The animators hated me for doing that! Maybe I went overboard. But I wanted the sense that when she goes through the tunnel into the other world, it just goes deep. When things go bad, I started shifting the 3D to not just be deep but to come at you and be uncomfortable, when she discovers this other world is a dangerous place.

There was a 3D society [the Advanced Imaging Society] that voted on the best 3D movie of the year. I didn’t even attend, because I assumed _Avatar_ [2009] was going to win, but our film won. I still haven’t been able to collect my award.  
**Interview by Alex Dudok de Wit, _Sight and Sound_, September 2024**
<br><br>

**CORALINE 3D**<br>

_Directed by:_ Henry Selick<br>

©: Laika, Inc.<br>

_Production Company:_ Laika Entertainment<br>

_In association with:_ Pandemonium<br>

_Presented by:_ Focus Features<br>

_Executive Producer:_ Michael Zoumas<br>

_Produced by:_ Bill Mechanic, Claire Jennings,  
Henry Selick, Mary Sandell<br>

_Line Producer:_ Harry Linden<br>

_Director, Production Accounting:_ Brad Day<br>

_Production Accountant:_ Joan Turgeon<br>

_Production Co-ordinator:_ Theresa Braunstein<br>

_Production Manager:_ Ezra J. Sumner<br>

_Stage Manager:_ Kirk Scott

_Post-production Supervisor:_ Jeannine Berger

_1st Assistant Director:_ Melissa St. Onge

_2nd Assistant Directors:_ Daniel Pascall,  
Matthew Fried

_3rd Assistant Directors:_ Jocelyn Stott,  
Jodi Rosenlof

_Continuity:_ Yona Prost

_Additional Casting by:_ Linda LaMontagne

_Voice Casting:_ Kalmenson & Kalmenson

_Written for the Screen by:_ Henry Selick

_Based on the Novel by:_ Neil Gaiman

_Storyboard Supervisor:_ Chris Butler

_Co-storyboard Supervisor:_ Mike Cachuela

_Storyboard Artists:_ Graham Annable, Vera Brosgol, Ean McNamara, Julian Narino

_Director of Photography:_ Pete Kozachik

_Lighting Cameramen:_ John Ashlee Prat,  
Paul Gentry, Peter Sorg, Chris Peterson,

Peter Williams, Frank Passingham, Mark Stewart

_Assistant Cameramen:_ Brian Fuller,  
Joshua Livingston, Adam Jones, Clay Connally, Michael Gerzevitz, Timothy Taylor, Ian Barrett,  
David Trappe, Dean Holmes

_Supervising Gaffer:_ Bryan Garver

_Visual Effects Supervisor:_ Brian van’t Hul

_Visual Effects Producer:_ Laura Schultz

_CG Supervisor:_ John R.A. Benson

_2D Supervisor:_ Steve Emerson

_Technical Director/Houdini Artist:_ Peter Stuart

_Digital Production Managers:_ Annie Pomeranz, Jamie Silverman

_Visual Effects Animator:_ John Allan Armstrong

_Visual Effects Co-ordinators:_ Michelle Vincig,  
Jason Brewer

_Model Shop Supervisor:_ Mitchell Romanauski

_Model Shop Co-ordinator:_ Cody Bartol

_Supervising Animator:_ Anthony Scott

_Editors:_ Christopher Murrie, Ronald Sanders

_Associate Editor:_ Cam Williams

_Visual Effects Editor:_ Sheila McIntosh

_Production Designer:_ Henry Selick

_Art Directors:_ Bo Henry, Tom Proost, Phil Brotherton

_Set Designers:_ Jason Lajka, William Sturrock

_Dragonflies Designed/Created by:_ Robert J. Lang

_Concept Artist:_ Tadahiro Uesugi

_Conceptual Artist:_ Lauren Bair

_Set Construction Co-ordinator:_ Drew Pinniger

_Digital Intermediates by:_  
Technicolor Digital Intermediates

_Music by:_ Bruno Coulais

_Score Performed by:_  
The Hungarian Symphony Orchestra Budapest

_Choir:_ Choir of the Hungarian National Radio

_Children’s Choir Soloist Voice Performed by:_ Mathilde Pellegrini

_Children’s Chorus:_ Camille Joutard, Coraline Tassy, Lucie Thevenet, Marianne Di Benedetto, Marie-Laura Colomba, Mayliss David, Mélissa Zerbib

_Keyboards:_ Bruno Coulais

_Oboe:_ Christophe Grindel

_Harp:_ Hélène Breschand

_Bass Guitar:_ Bernard Paganotti

_Orchestra Conducted by:_ Laurent Petitgirard

_Children’s Choir Conductor:_ Alain Joutard

_Orchestrations by:_ Bruno Coulais

_Sound Design:_ Ron Eng

_Sound Designer:_ Randy Thom

_Re-recording Mixers:_ Tom Johnson, Randy Thom

_Supervising Sound Editor:_ Ron Eng

_Co-supervising Sound Editor:_ David A. Cohen

_Dialogue [Editor]:_ David A. Cohen

_Dialogue Recording:_ Carlos Sotelango

_Effects Editors:_ Steve Tushar, Steve Boeddeker

_ADR Recording:_ Carlos Sotelango

_Foley Artist:_ Dan O’Connell

_Foley Mixer:_ John T. Cucci

_Supervising Foley Editor:_ Willard J. Overstreet

_Digital Systems Supervisor:_ Martin Pelham

_Publicist:_ Maggie Begley

_Voice Cast:_

Dakota Fanning _(Coraline Jones)_

Teri Hatcher _(Mel, Coraline’s mother/other mother)_

Jennifer Saunders _(Miss Spink)_

Dawn French _(Miss Forcible)_

Keith David _(cat)_

John Hodgman  
_(Charlie, Coraline’s father/other father)_

Robert Bailey Jr _(Wybie Lovat)_

Ian McShane _(Mr Bobinsky)_

Aankha Neal _(sweet ghost girl)_

George Selick _(ghost boy)_

Hannah Kaiser _(tall ghost girl)_

Harry Selick, Marina Budovsky _(photo friends)_

Emerson Hatcher _(magic dragonfly)_

Jerome Ranft _(mover)_

Christopher Murrie, Jeremy Ryder _(toys)_

Carolyn Crawford _(Wybie’s grandmother)_

Yona Prost _(Shakespeare rascal)_

USA 2008©

100 mins

Digital 3D
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNDAwOTkxMjgzXX0=
-->