
**Sam Raimi on ‘The Evil Dead’**  
Before I made the first _Evil Dead_, I had never read an EC comic or H.P. Lovecraft. Although there are very similar themes, especially with Lovecraft: the ‘something dark’ that lives in the woods, an unseen force similar to the Dunwich Horror. The comic-book style of the EC comics – that is, over-the-top, bloody and absurd – was also a feature of many modern American comics of the 70s, including the DC horror comics which I had read. But my major influences were Stephen King (I’d just read _The Shining_ and _Carrie_), some of the horror stories of M.R. James, especially ‘Casting the Runes’, and the motion picture _Night of the Living Dead_.

In 1980, I was just trying to break into the business. I had no idea how to make a feature film, I’d made a number of films in Super-8 but never one as long as 90 minutes, and never one that people had to pay a few dollars to see. My two partners, Robert Tapert and Bruce Campbell, and myself raised the money independently in Detroit and shot the film in Detroit and Tennessee. We then took it to New York to edit which is where I met Joel Coen. He was working as an assistant editor to Edna Ruth Paul and his brother Ethan was a statistical accountant at Macy’s. Joel also cut one or two scenes for the film and Ethan contributed the voice-over for the Necronomicon. At first no American distributor would touch the film, but then the BFI showed it as a festival film and it was picked up by the British press, who were very kind to me. There were some bad reviews as well, but overall I was able to take the positive comments back to the States and work out a distribution deal.  
**Interview by Farrah Anwar, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, December 1990**

**A contemporary review**  
Although the screeching possessees here recall Dario Argento, and their messy, startling fates evoke the dread Lucio Fulci, _The Evil Dead_ is more successful than its Italian precursors. Acknowledging that narrative economy is as important as spectacular putrefaction, Sam M. Raimi has turned his mishmash of horror-comic familiars, _Exorcist_-style levitation and possession, and undigested chunks of Lovecraft lore into an enjoyable, catch-all rollercoaster ride through the splatter genre. The film opens with a flourish of omens that clearly signpost horrors to come: the dangerous old bridge that connects the characters to the outside world crumbles as it is crossed; a subjective-camera demon crashes through the woods; a torn poster for _The Hills Have Eyes_ decorates the cellar; and endlessly swirling dry-ice fog gives way to a crackling storm which punctuates the archaeologist’s tape with ominous rumbles. Raimi continues to pander to genre cognoscenti throughout, with deliberately flat dialogue (‘I know now that my wife has become host to a Kandarian demon’) and specific borrowings from sources as unlikely as _Orphée_ (the rippling mirror) and as obscure as _Quatermass II_ (a burst pipe disgorging blood).

Such knowingness might prove irritating if _The Evil Dead_ were nothing more than the sum total of its hommages, but Raimi displays a distinct talent for organising his shock effects. The film’s EC-style sick humour fully emerges in its reversal of recent genre cliches: the macho Ash is reduced to a display of whimpering collapse in the Jamie Lee Curtis manner, while the womenfolk change from vulnerable victims into giggling witches, as much given to high-pitched, infantile taunts (‘We’re going to get you!’) as actual murderous attacks. After the final display of special effects (which goes as far beyond the similar finale of _The Devil’s Rain_ as that had surpassed the comparatively tame dissolution of Hammer’s _Dracula_), the film provides a headlong, last-minute shock which neatly caps the more graphic arboreal rapes and cannibal gnawings hitherto inflicted on the doomed intruders.  
**Kim Newman, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, November 1982**
<br><br>

**THE EVIL DEAD**  
_Director:_ Sam M. Raimi  
_Production Company:_ Renaissance Pictures  
_Executive Producers:_ Robert Tapert,  
Bruce Campbell, Sam M. Raimi  
_Producer:_ Robert Tapert  
_Assistant Producer:_ George Holt  
_Production Assistant:_ Don Campbell  
_Story Consultant:_ Sheila Roberts  
_Screenplay:_ Sam M. Raimi  
_Director of Photography:_ Tim Philo  
_2nd Unit Photography:_ Joshua M. Becker  
_Lighting:_ Tim Philo  
_Stills Photography:_ Mike Ditz  
_Special Photographic Effects:_ Bart Pierce  
_Editor:_ Edna Ruth Paul  
_Assistant Editor:_ Joel Coen  
_Construction Supervisor:_ Steve ‘the Dart’ Frankel  
_Special Make-up Effects:_ Tom Sullivan  
_Post Opticals:_ Dynamic Film Lab  
_Negative Matching:_ J.G. Films Inc  
_Music:_ Joseph LoDuca  
_Music Editor:_ Sheb Wooley  
_Music Engineer:_ Ed Wolfrum  
_Music Engineered at:_ Audio Graphics  
_Location Sound Recording:_ John Mason  
_Re-recording Engineer:_ Mel Zelniker  
_Supervising Sound Editor:_ Joseph R. Masefield  
_Assistant Sound Editor:_ Dolores Elliott  
_Dialogue Editor:_ Lou Kleinman  
_Transportation Captain:_ David H. Goodman  
_Special Thanks to:_ Simon Nuchtern, Carol Pierce  
_Fake Shemps:_ Philip A. Gillis, Dorothy Tapert, Cheryl Guttridge, Barbara Carey, David Horton, Wendell Thomas, Don Long, Stu Smith, Kurt Rauf, Ted Raimi, Ivan Raimi, Bill Vincent, Mary Beth Tapert, Scott Spiegel, John Cameron, Joanne Kruse, Gwen Cochanski, Debie Jarczewski  
_Cast:_

Bruce Campbell _(Ash)_  
Ellen Sandweiss _(Cheryl)_  
Betsy Baker _(Linda)_  
Hal Delrich _(Scott)_  
Sarah York _(Shelly)_  
Sam Raimi _(fisherman/voice of evil spirit)_ *  
Robert Tapert _(local yokel)_ *  
USA 1982

85 mins

Digital

* Uncredited

The screening on Fri 5 Jan will be introduced by Graham Humphreys, freelance illustrator and designer of the original UK marketing for  
_The Evil Dead_
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNDg2OTkzNzUxXX0=
-->