

<![endif]-->

A young orphan lives on the shores of the Persian Gulf, a place of dazzling light and oil refineries. When he’s not running chasing trains, the boy has learned to survive in a hostile society by collecting empty bottles at the harbour, shining shoes and selling iced water on the streets.

Amir Naderi’s lyrical autobiographical portrait of childhood is a work of staggering power, reminiscent of De Sica’s _Shoeshine_ and Truffaut’s _The 400 Blows_.

bfi.org.uk

**A contemporary review**

_The Runner_ tells a story of destitution and determination remarkable by any standards, and doubly remarkable for being the autobiographical account of the maker’s own childhood. Almost of equal interest to the story of Amiro’s rise from garbage picker to shoe-shine boy might have been that from shoe-shine boy to filmmaker. _The Runner_ partakes of the single-mindedness of its protagonist. The race is to the fleet of foot both literally and figuratively, and in a world in which everything has its price – Amiro must pay for the burnt-out light bulb he gets from Uncle Gholam, pay for the inner tube without which he cannot join the gang of bottlescavenging boys, and pay for ice he will sell again as cold water – Amiro learns, of necessity, to outrun both adversaries and friends.

The race, Amir Naderi suggests, is born of desperation but carries its own reward. It is in fact its sense of desperation that prevents _The Runner_ becoming a hymn to individualistic enterprise. Amiro has no alternative. He watches a man drag his dying wife from the garbage dump after presumably a lifetime on the tip, and sees the mutilation that can result from working the shark-infested waters. Indulging not at all in neo-realism’s tendency towards pathos, Naderi allows himself little in the way of poignancy either. We have to be alert to catch the significance of the purchase of the light bulb, Amiro’s latest addition to a string of burnt-out bulbs festooning the derelict cabin in which he lives, an attempt to duplicate the illuminations strung round the harbourside cafe to which he is so magnetically drawn.

Amiro is also part ‘wild child’, part of an under-class denied a means of articulating its plight. His jubilant recital of the alphabet to the pounding waves powerfully catches the sense of someone ‘finding a voice’ for the first time. But it is Amiro’s inability to articulate, or perhaps differentiate, his feelings – certainly few confidences are shared, and for the most part his existence is a solitary one – that proves a major stumbling block for the film. Naderi everywhere registers, rather than elucidates, Amiro’s responses. The passionate cry which ends the film, and with which Amiro has greeted the flight of ‘his’ plane, his victory in the race, or his delight at the harbour lights, remains frustratingly ambiguous. The film’s strength, however, lies in its matter-of-fact and non-voyeuristic picture of world, so that we see the wasteland around the port as he sees it and take it similarly for granted.  
**Verina Glaessner, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, August 1988**  
<br>
<![endif]-->

**The Runner (Dawandeh)**

_Director_: Amir Naderi  
_Production Company_: Institute for the Intellectual Development of Children and Young People  
_Executive Producer_: Fathola Dalili  
_Technicians_: Ali Asghar Mirzai, Mohammad Mafi, Hassan Karimi, Michael Nedai, Johangir Azad, Ahmed Anwar  
_Assistant Director_: Mohammad Hassanzadeh  
_Screenplay_: Amir Naderi, Behruz Gharibpur  
_Photography_: Firouz Malekzadeh  
_Camera Operators_: Bijan Arfanian, Ali Bageri  
_Editor_: Bahram Beyzaï  
_Production Designer_: Gholam Reza Ramezani  
_Location Design_: Amir Naderi,

Mohammad Hassanzadeh  
_Titles_: Abdullah Alimurad, Ali Asgharzadeh, Mohammad Reza Bakhtiari  
_Sound_: Nezam-e-Din Kia’i  
_Sound Re-recording_: Mohammad Haghighi  
_Sound Sync_: Eraj Chahzadi  

**Cast**    
Majid Niroumand _(Amiro)_  
Musa Torkizadeh _(Musa)_  
A. Gholamzadeh _(uncle Gholam)_  
Reza Ramezani _(Ramezan)_  
Shirzan Bechkal  
Ali Pasdarzadeh  
Mehrdad Kabiri  
Heydar Nazari  
Abed Ostowar  
Mohammed Nawazi  
Farshid Farshizadeh  
Abbas Nazeri  
Fred Heilander  
Abbas Hashemian  
Mohammad Ali Amini  
Mohsen Shahmohamadi  
Faghihpur  
Ardechiri  
Behruz Maghsudlu  

Iran 1984  
94 mins  
Digital (restoration)  

Restored in 2K from the original negative by Cineric.  
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTEzNDU1NTIyMDhdfQ==
-->