

<![endif]-->

_When Harry Met Sally…_ is so much more than a faked orgasm and a punchline. Not only does it offer many more pleasures than these, admittedly fine comic moments, it also stands as a pivotal film that helped reinvigorate the romantic comedy genre. Paradoxically, the film is well loved but also misunderstood and underappreciated: viewers know it is good, funny and poignant, but perhaps do not fully realise how important and influential it is. But _When Harry Met Sally…_ is worthy of a place in a romcom pantheon with other films that introduced or perfected a whole new subgenre, like _It Happened One Night_ (1934) with the screwball, _Pillow Talk_ (1959)  with the battle-of-the-sexes comedy and _Annie Hall_ (1977)  with the radical romcom; _When Harry Met Sally…_ is similarly transformative.

It needs to be appreciated as a pivotal film in two ways: for stimulating a revival of the romantic comedy after the genre had idled for over a decade, and for reinvigorating the products of that genre in ways that changed what romcom meant and could do.

It was released in a decade in which the romcom was extremely under-represented at the box office. In looking at the increased number of romantic comedies that began to appear after _When Harry Met Sally…_ I am not arguing that these later films were made expressly because of its success, but rather that its popularity indicated audience hunger for such films, and that other directors then began to tap into this with more confidence. Indeed, year on year across the succeeding decade the romcom came back into its own, increasing from 1990’s two romcom hits to five in 1993, eight in 1995, ten in 1997 and so on to a high of 13 in 1999. _When Harry Met Sally…_ had indicated that the romcom could be big business again and, while hardly any of the films that followed could match its combination of traditional conventions and innovative elements, many obviously tried to emulate its success by borrowing directly from it.

Close analysis reveals the film to be carefully and cleverly organised. Along with Nora Ephron’s witty script, adroit direction from Rob Reiner, and performances from principals Billy Crystal and Meg Ryan that are both comic and touching, the film’s structure plays a significant part in its appeal: while it seems to chart in a loose, organic way the haphazard development of the protagonists’ relationship, it takes place within a rigorous framework, enabling a subtle deployment of echoes and parallels across the narrative.

It may seem strange that a film as popular as _When Harry Met Sally…_ now it needs to be dissected to reveal what it does so audaciously and brilliantly, but in order to understand it for the trailblazer it was, I think analysis is necessary.

First, it introduced its central couple and then dropped them for five years – and then did it again. When other romcoms make narrative fodder out of the events of _One Fine Day_ (1996) or one night _(Nick and Norah’s Infinite Playlist_, 2008), one of the Reiner-Ephron film’s most audacious moves is to stretch its story out over 12 years. Richard Linklater might perhaps be seen as responding to this in allowing a real-time gap of nine years to elapse between filming _Before Sunrise_ (1995), its original companion piece, _Before Sunset_ (2004) and its most recent return, _Before Midnight_ (2013).

Second, then, _When Harry Met Sally…_ gave realism back to the genre, which is one reason it is so well loved. The protagonists do not meet cute, fall in love at first sight, know instantly they have met The One and then spend forever loving that person. Like people in real life, they get it wrong, get hurt, get older, get closer, get it wrong again, then finally learn how and when to make amends, and get married. This is a much more credible timeline, which lets us relate to the protagonists and their narrative. And then when they do get together, there is no dramatic _deux ex machina_, no great reversal of fortune, no car crash or coma, to make them realise, just their separation and then a growing realisation of what they mean to each other. The evident regret that bedevils Harry towards the finale is very realistic, even if he remains largely in denial of it.

Third, the film is beautifully structured, but so lightly that it is perfectly possible just to enjoy the parallels, echoes and returns without closer analysis. And this leads to fourth, which is the movie’s enjoyably complex editing and sound mixes, and its recourse to a range of filmic techniques, such as split-screen, voiceover and montage, which both enrich the film itself _and_ gesture in affectionate tribute to some of the great romantic comedies of the past.

Fifth, _When Harry Met Sally…_ is funny, with not only a great written script but inspired improvisation from a quartet and more of actors who give excellent performances. And again, leading on from this, is sixth: its heroine. This is a film in which the heroine is not a cipher, not a fantasy of a woman (unlike _Working Girl_’s sexy Cinderella who has ‘a head for business and a bod for sin’) but a character as well rounded as the man she spars with and learns to love. As much popular culture debate about Bechdel Tests and Manic Pixie Dream Girls has shown lately, the concept of the fully rounded female lead character is sadly all too uncommon now.

Seventh and finally, the film has been influential, not only in establishing that the romcom could be profitable at the box office, but that the genre, although one of the very oldest in cinema, could continue to evolve and renew itself.

**Extract from _When Harry Met Sally…_ by Tamar Jeffers McDonald (BFI Film Classics; BFI/Palgrave, 2015) Reproduced by kind permission of Bloomsbury Publishing. ©Tamar Jeffers McDonald**  
<br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTk1MTIwMTE1OSwxMzU5MjI1MDM1XX0=
-->