

<![endif]-->

‘An Asian Troy’ is how John Woo describes the Manichean power struggles that gripped China at the end of the Han Dynasty, as recounted in the 14th-century literary classic _Romance of the Three Kingdoms_. Woo’s film _Red Cliff_ focuses on just one of the episodes in that expansive saga, the decisive battle of the title, in which an ad hoc alliance of provincial rulers fend off invasion, against all the odds, from a ruthless warlord eager to annex their territories.

Woo’s first film in China for almost two decades, and his first for the state-run China Film Group Corporation in Beijing, it is the country’s most expensive production ever, with an $80 million budget part-funded from Japan, Taiwan and South Korea. It’s easy to see where the money has gone: with art direction from Timmy Yip (_Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon_) and visual effects from Californian studio the Orphanage, in terms of sheer spectacle _Red Cliff_ easily out-trumps even Zhang Yimou’s recent period epics.

That Woo has managed to pull off such an undertaking is as much due to the exalted pedigree of the source material as to his status as arguably the most influential action director to emerge from Asia. The various episodes and vast pantheon of princesses, scheming politicians and military tacticians of which Romance of the Three Kingdoms is comprised are well known across South-East Asia and have been celebrated in a variety of media, from films and manga to videogames (another take on the material, Daniel Lee’s _Three Kingdoms: Resurrection of the Dragon_, pre-empted Woo’s film by a couple of months). The story probably won’t be so familiar to western audiences, hence the decision to edit the two separately released instalments distributed in Asia into a standalone 150-minute international version. The resulting film doesn’t bear too many scars from the truncation, but inevitably it’s the three lavishly constructed battles, crammed full of Woo’s trademark gravity-defying gymnastics and slow-motion sequences choreographed by Corey Yuen  
(_The Transporter_, _X-Men_), that dominate proceedings. _Red Cliff_ doesn’t waste any time getting into the thick of things, with despotic warlord Cao Cao’s sacking of the kingdom of Xu commencing in the first reel.

Woo has stated that his goal for the film was to strip away the mythologising of the novel and get back to its historical basis, as chronicled at the time. To what extent he has achieved this has been the subject of some debate: the director freely admits to borrowing certain scenes from his fictional source, such as the standout sequence in which the alliance’s chief strategist Zhuge Liang dispatches a fleet of barges mounted with straw dummies to draw the fire of Cao Cao’s naval battalion. In attempting to create an Asian blockbuster in the Hollywood mould, Woo has retained his cinematic verve, resulting in lingering images such as the scenes of the tomboyish Princess Sun Shangxiang leading Cao Cao’s cavalry into a sandstorm to be skewered by a hail of arrows, or the awe-inspiring single take of the camera levitating from Cao Cao’s face as he stands on deck and tracking over his fleet as it floats ominously down the Yangzte Gorge. If the _mano-a-mano_ that seals Cao Cao’s fate at the finale comes across as a little underwhelming, it’s only due to the sheer virtuosity of what precedes it. _Red Cliff_ is seldom short of breathtaking.

Jasper Sharp, _Sight and Sound_, July 2009

Best known for Hong Kong thrillers such as _Hard Boiled_ and high-end Hollywood actioners _Face/Off_ and _Mission: Impossible II_, John Woo has gone ‘back’ to China for his Mandarin-language historical epic _Red Cliff_. Released in the UK as a 145-minute version, cut down from its 290-minute totality, the film is set in 208 AD, when two minor Chinese kingdoms joined forces to defeat a powerful imperial prime minister of sinister disposition. Its production was dogged by accidents and disasters: a stuntman was killed, key actors and the cinematographer departed, and the shoot overran. Most of these problems Woo puts down to attempting to make a Hollywood-style movie without the infrastructure to support it. ‘I had to put a lot of time and money aside for training,’ he says.

Back in 2004, Woo recalls, he was asked to help the movie business in China. He decided there was only one way to do this: to make a movie there. Where he found shortfalls in skills, he would train people up. ‘Chinese movies are changing and I wanted to do something for the young people,’ he says. ‘I wanted the young people to learn the Hollywood experience, to use new equipment, experience new systems.’ One thing in his favour, though, was that at least everyone he employed already knew the story of the film. The famous set-piece battle that forms the core of the film was immortalised 700 years ago in the novel _Romance of the Three Kingdoms_, and is known all over Asia via videogames and Manga comics. Woo recognised that the storyline conformed to Hollywood traditions – the idea of people who team up together against overwhelming odds and defeat an evil centralising power is at the heart of many a Western. He was keen to strip away supernatural and fanciful aspects of the story and go back to basics.

One of the biggest problems he had to face early on was the departure of Chow Yun-Fat from the lead role only weeks before the movie went into production. Various versions of events appeared on the net: a US insurance company rejected 73 clauses of Chow’s contract; Chow didn’t like being sent a final script with only days to prepare. When asked, Woo doesn’t beat around the bush: ‘His agent was asking for more money.’

In the event Tony Leung, who had earlier been cast and then left the project, came back on board to play Chow’s abandoned role. ‘Tony Leung called me up to comfort me,’ recalls Woo. ‘I asked him to come back on board the film and he did.’ Having made three films together, Leung was someone he could trust. ‘He’ll never leave a set, no matter how hard it is, however tired he is,’ says Woo. ‘When I was busy working on the big scenes he was helping me take care of other actors. I also think he’s getting more charming as he gets older.’ With its complex financing from Japan and America, as well as South Korea, China and Taiwan, the film took eight-and-a-half months to film in over 14 provinces. There were six film units. ‘In America you work five days and then take the weekend off,’ says Woo, ‘but in China everyone works seven days a week.’ This isn’t necessarily an advantage: ‘People didn’t get enough rest,’ he adds. One thing Woo enjoyed, though, was the simplicity of the command structure. ‘In Hollywood it takes a lot of time to make a new decision. In China I just made the decision – I didn’t have to go to a meeting with a producer.’ He also enjoyed commanding 2,000 troops from the Chinese army. Do all directors have a secret yen to command armies, I ask him? ‘Oh yes,’ he laughs.

Logistically the shoot was like a military campaign. Though Woo’s not keen to talk about the bad things that happened – including the death of a stuntman in a freak accident in 2008 – he insists he never lost faith that the film would be finished; his ‘very strong will’ is something he attributes to his Hong Kong upbringing. Despite talk of the film being unlucky, it was well reviewed (_Variety_ claims Woo has got his ‘mojo’ back), and has made money. Woo says he misses Hong Kong and would like to go back and make a film there: ‘A swordplay movie – I’d make it in a studio, because locations are so hard to use there now.’ His next film, however, will be another costume drama, a ‘Romeo and Juliet story’ set in mainland China, in Lu’an. On the horizon after that is a hommage to one of his directing idols, Jean-Pierre Melville. His love for Melville’s 1970 heist movie _Le Cercle rouge_ is on record, but now he has another Melville film his sights. ‘One of my plans is to remake _Le Samouraï_,’ he reveals. ‘We are looking for the writer to work on that project. It’s one of my great ambitions.’  
**By Roger Clarke, _Sight and Sound_, July 2009**  
<br>

<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTAyOTI0ODcxNl19
-->