
_+ intro with author Anthony Hayward_

The story of the United States’ final withdrawal from Vietnam was one that John Pilger was inspired to turn into a screenplay, based on those events that he covered for the _Mirror_ and in his book _The Last Day_. The result, also titled _The Last Day_, eventually reached the screen as a 75-minute BBC television play in March 1983, but not until after it had been turned down by major Hollywood studios. Pilger had planned it as a feature film and shown a ‘treatment’ to British producer David Puttnam, who liked it and offered it to the major studios in Los Angeles. ‘I saw the assessment reports from the studios and all were highly favourable,’ recalled Pilger, ‘but there is a box they had to tick at the end about political content and most carried the comment that the film would never be accepted politically, that the time was wrong.’

In February 1979, _The Deer Hunter_ was screened at the Berlin Film Festival, only weeks after the Chinese had attacked Vietnam, following similar incursions from Cambodia over a long period by Pol Pot’s Khmer Rouge. Delegations from the Soviet Union, Cuba, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and East Germany withdrew from the festival in protest at the film’s screening at such a time. But _The Deer Hunter_ won five Oscars. It was certainly a powerful film, but its portrayal of the Vietnamese as ‘gooks’ and Oriental sadists was, as Pilger later wrote, a falsehood of history and racist. In one sequence, they were seen forcing American prisoners to take part in a game of Russian roulette. Pilger had never come across this and neither had any other correspondent. Much later, director Michael Cimino admitted that it had been added for dramatic effect.

‘_The Deer Hunter_ was a very ambiguous film,’ explained Pilger, ‘but it was basically peddling the old John Wayne message that the Vietnamese were Oriental bastards and the Americans were tragic heroes. It presented the invaders as victims. It was one of the most manipulative films ever made. I went to see it in Leicester Square, in London’s West End, and Scarth [Flett], my then wife, had to restrain me from protesting there and then. I was so incensed by the film’s rank dishonesty.’

Pilger’s own screenplay, which he had written ‘on spec’ after the idea had been rejected in the United States, was then taken up by BBC special features producer John Purdie, who had made _Sailor_, the popular documentary series about the Royal Navy, and _The Hong Kong Beat_, which followed the British Colonial Force in Britain’s last colony. For budgetary reasons, _The Last Day_ was shot on videotape in a BBCstudio at Shepherd’s Bush, with a handful of sets, over 14 hours in just one day. This drama was mixed with actuality footage. Dan O’Herlihy played the American ambassador, David Suchet was the CIA station chief and Charles Dance a British journalist who was based partly on Pilger himself. ‘He was meant to look like me, but his character was a conglomerate of four or five correspondents,’ explained Pilger. ‘As the production progressed, I realised that the character was becoming more and more like me. So, rather embarrassed by this, I hacked away at Charles’s part and reduced it to a minor character. I fear I may have upset him.’

The play, shown on BBC2 in March 1983, was generally well received. Philip Jacobson, who had known Pilger as a fellow reporter in Vietnam, wrote in _The Sunday Times_, ‘Pilger’s début as a TV dramatist… is fairly successful in capturing the frenetic, often surreal, flavour of Saigon at the time… To my surprise, and pleasure, _The Last Day_ resists the temptation to trumpet the broad, often irrational streak of anti-Americanism which I think has sometimes damaged Pilger’s reporting from south-east Asia.’

Stanley Reynolds, who had received a torrent of abuse from readers when only a month earlier he had given Pilger’s documentary _The Truth Game_ a scathing review in _The Guardian_, was more generous about _The Last Day_. ‘It would take an extremely silly man not to be engrossed by the film,’ wrote Reynolds, but he continued his earlier theme of mocking Pilger’s clothes and appearance by describing Charles Dance as ‘a tall, handsome man in pressed jeans, an ironed shirt and flowing blond locks’ and asking, ‘Was this the Bondi Bombshell himself..?’ (A reference to _Private Eye_’s nickname for Pilger as ‘the Blond Bombshell from Bondi Beach’.)

The right-wing _Daily Telegraph_ still managed to continue its policy of slating almost every programme that Pilger made. ‘Television’s most favoured propagandist showed the Americans, especially ambassador Dan O’Herlihy, as deluded by their own rhetoric,’ wrote Sean Day-Lewis. ‘The Vietnamese who clung to US protection even as he flew away were labelled “scum”. The Communist victory was accepted by implication as an historic inevitability that could only be opposed by the wicked and the foolish.’  
**Anthony Hayward, _Breaking the Silence: The Films of John Pilger_ (Profiles International Media, 2013)**  
<![if !supportLineBreakNewLine]>  
<![endif]>

**Anthony Hayward** is a journalist and author specialising in television and film. A regular contributor to _The Guardian_, he has written the books _Phantom: Michael Crawford Unmasked_, _Julie Christie_ and _Which Side Are You On?: Ken Loach and His Films_. In 2013, he updated _In the Name of Justice: The Television Reporting of John Pilger_, originally published by Bloomsbury, as the e-book _Breaking the Silence: The Films of John Pilger_, available through Amazon.

<![endif]-->

**THE LAST DAY**

_Director_: Richard Stroud  
_Production Company_: BBC TV  
_Executive Producer_: John Purdie  
_[Written] by_: John Pilger

_Lighting:_ Dave Sydenham

_Designer:_ Martin Collins

_Sound:_ John Delaney

_Cast:_

Dan O’Herlihy _(The American Ambassador)_  
David Suchet _(Howard)_  
Charles Dance _(Alan)_

David de Keyser _(Secretary of State)_

Lawrence Davidson _(French Ambassador)_

Ron Berglas _(Sam)_

John Cassady _(Flaherty)_

Christopher Good _(Carl)_

Fred Lee Own _(uncle)_

Eugene Lipinski _(TV reporter)_

Raymond Marlowe _(Deputy Ambassador)_

Barry Dennen _(Tad)_

Me Me Lai _(‘shop steward’)_

Wei Wei Wong _(bar girl)_

Al Matthews _(embassy guard)_

Stuart Milligan, Russell Sommers _(embassy aides)_

Major Wiley _(communications officer)_

Wendy Raebeck _(embassy secretary)_

Edward Wiley _(Ralph)_

Christopher Malcolm _(American at airport)_

Peter Banks _(processor)_

Fiesta Mei Ling _(girl at airport)_

Hal Galili _(Smith)_

Bruce Boa _(general)_

Vincent Wong _(South Vietnamese general)_

Robert Lee _(doctor)_

Yves Aubert _(French TV cameraman)_

Christopher Muncke _(missionary)_

Nadim Sawalha _(money changer)_

Andy Ho _(old man Nha)_

Michael John Paliotti _(marine)_

Kristopher Kum _(Giggles)_

Joe Praml _(American in embassy)_

Jonathan Stephens _(general’s aide)_

Pat Michon _(Ambassador’s secretary)_

Blain Fairman _(disc jockey)_

Bob Sherman _(marine colonel)_

Jay Benedict _(marine sergeant)_

Michael Fitzpatrick _(marine captain)_

BBC2 tx 30.3.1983

75 mins

Digital
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMjYxNzE5MzEyXX0=
-->