---
layout: post
title: Taxi
published: true
date: 2024-10-28
readtime: true
categories: [ART OF ACTION<br> CELEBRATING THE REAL ACTION STARS OF CINEMA']
tags: [Action]
metadata: 'France 1998, 86 mins<br> Director: Gérard Pirès'
pdf: '2024-10-28-taxi.pdf'
---

**SPOILER WARNING **The following notes give away some of the plot.

This furiously fast and funny action flic flick kick-started one of the most successful franchises in French film history. A non-driving cop coerces a speed-obsessed, law-breaking taxi driver into helping him pursue a gang of Mercedes-driving bank robbers who bring mayhem to the streets of Marseille. C’est magnifique!  
**Dick Fiddy, bfi.org.uk**

**A contemporary review**  
Last summer’s surprise hit in France, Gérard Pirès’ cops-and-robbers car-chase comedy _Taxi_ arrives belatedly in the UK with a certain reputation in tow: it drew a domestic audience of over 6 million, had high-octane panache rivalling the best of Hollywood and Luc Besson’s name stamped all over it. Besson produced and wrote the ﬁlm, reportedly turning out the script during pre-production discussions for _The Fifth Element_. Pirès, best remembered for his comedies _Erotissimo_ (1968) and _Elle court, elle court la banlieue_ (1972), graduated to feature ﬁlm-making from shorts and television in the wake of May ’68, and directed eight ﬁlms before a serious motorcycle accident forced him into temporary retirement. He subsequently re-emerged as one of France’s most successful directors of advertisements, notably of visually arresting car adverts.

On the evidence here, writing the script entailed for Besson subjecting his favourite US television series to a cut-and-paste process (_Starsky and Hutch_ gets a nod, but the tone is more _The Dukes of Hazzard_), resulting in a compendium of familiar gizmos, plot twists and characters that unashamedly panders to aspiring boy racers everywhere. But the ﬁlm is also played out through references to French comic-book and popular cop ﬁlm traditions. Henri Verneuil’s Jean-Paul Belmondo vehicles are obvious precursors (the Athens-based car chase in his 1972 _Le Casse_ comes to mind), and Claude Zidi’s incomparably superior _Les Ripoux/Le Cop_ is referenced (or, less generously, recycled). Marseilles is shot to look like San Francisco circa _Bullitt_ (1968), local colour reduced to the glimpses caught beyond the rapidly disappearing asphalt. A single picture-postcard view of the city is inserted presumably as a ‘thank you’ to the municipal authorities.

Where Godard threw similar ingredients together in 1966 and came up with the startlingly inventive _Made in U.S.A._, Besson and Pirès’ leaden hotchpotch has the ﬂavour of _déjà vu_. Where _Made in U.S.A._ is fuelled by a biting critique of French society and a prescient reﬂection on the US colonisation of the European mindset, Besson and Pirès merely tack youth friendly clichés (institutionalised racism, police ineptitude and so on) on to the ﬁlm’s exterior. Granted, Pirès has done a good job on the stunts and car chases, some of them superbly choreographed at genuinely high speeds. For a ﬁlm that draws freely on the French erotic comic-book tradition, the racial stereotyping and sexism come as no surprise. Besides being systematically introduced via shots of their legs, none of the female characters is more than a caricature. France’s bypassing of the UK’s detour through ‘new man’ sensibility, however, means that in this country the ﬁlm can now plug neatly into a male youth market weaned on a brutish ‘new laddism’.

Rap group IAM make a fair stab at encouraging the action along through the often laborious non-action scenes, then upping the tempo (and volume) appropriately for the sporadic big-bang crescendoes. The generally young cast provide a welcome injection of good-natured buffoonery into a stale ﬁlm whose principal signiﬁcance lies less in any intrinsic artistic quality than in the French public’s acceptance of a young non-white French actor, Samy Naceri, in the lead role of a major box-ofﬁce hit. But despite the ﬁlm’s success, which guaranteed an almost instant sequel (_Taxi 2_ is currently in production), nothing dispels the lingering sense that this is a lacklustre hybrid. Besson and Pirès have ended up underscoring the paucity of a cinema that contents itself with the formulaic regurgitation of the forms and aspirations of Hollywood and its televisual derivatives or of a European cinema that is – in every sense other than geographically – made in the USA.  
**Michael Witt, _Sight and Sound_, December 1999**  
<br>

**TAXI**
_Director:_ Gérard Pirès  
_Producer:_ Michèle Pétin  
_Producers (ARP):_ Laurent Pétin, Michèle Halberstadt  
_Producer:_ Luc Besson *  
_Screenplay:_ Luc Besson  
_Director of Photography:_ Jean-Pierre Sauvaire  
_Editor:_ Véronique Lange  
_Art Director:_ Jean-Jacques Gernolle  
_Music:_ 1AM  

**Cast**  
Samy Naceri _(Daniel Morales)_  
Frédéric Diefenthal _(Émilien Coutan Kermadec)_  
Marion Cotillard _(Lilly, Daniel’s girlfriend)_  
Emma Sjöberg _(Petra, a cop)_  
Manuela Gourary _(Camille, a cop)_  
Bernard Farcy _(Chief Inspector Gibert)_  
Georges Neri _(Joe)_  
Guy Quang _(Pizza Joe motorcyclist)_  
Maurice Murcia _(retired taxi-driver)_  
Sabine Bail _(receptionist, town hall)_  
Dan Herzberg _(Paulo)_  
Sébastien Thiery _(driving instructor)_  
Eric Berenger _(the butcher)_  
Philippe Du Janerand _(airport fare in a hurry)_  
Christophe Fesquet _(speed cop 1)_  
Gérard Vantaggioli _(speed cop 2)_  
Edouard Montoute _(Alain)_  
Tara Römer _(Émilien’s colleague)_  
Christian Mazzuchini _(pilot 1)_  
Guillaume Lanson _(pilot 2)_  
Sébastien Pons _(Akim, called ‘Rachid’)_  
Malek Béchar _(Marco)_  
Gérard Dubouche _(Gibert’s chauffeur)_  
Richard Sammel _(German 1)_  
Niels Dubost _(German 2)_  
Franck Libert _(German 3)_  
Dominique Noé _(minister)_  
Pierre Brichese _(minister’s chauffeur)_  
Stéphan Chriz _(German 4)_  
Paul Fructus _(bar owner)_  
Grégory Knop _(Kruger)_  
Denis Braccini _(fireman)_  
Bernard Destouches _(roadblock cop)_  
Emilio Martinez _(cleaner, 2nd bank)_  
Catherine Alias _(cleaner)_  
Stéphane Algoud _(Jimmy, key cutter)_  
Thierry Melia _(bank cashier)_  
Jérôme Leleu _(Jean Bat)_  
Jean-François Palaccio _(younger dumb cop)_  
Henri Masini _(older dumb cop)_  
Jean-Baptiste Chaudoul _(cop at traffic light 13)_  
Paul Silve _(the commissioner)_  
Didier Gayral _(man with the box)_  
Stéphane Eichenholc _(speed cop 3)_  

France 1998  
86 mins  
Digital  

\* Uncredited
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTExNzQ2MzU3NzFdfQ==
-->