---
layout: post
title: Face/
published: true
date: 2024-11-02
readtime: true
categories: [ART OF ACTION<br> CELEBRATING THE REAL ACTION STARS OF CINEMA]
tags: [Action, War, Period]
metadata:'Virgin IslandsUK-USA-People's Republic of ChinaJapan/Taiwan 2009, 145 mins<br> Director: John Woo'
pdf: '2024-11-02-red-cliff.pdf'
---

The original tagline of John Woo’s outlandish, high-octane masterpiece read, ‘In order to trap him, he must become him’. That doesn’t come close to capturing the full insanity of this film, which sees John Travolta’s FBI Special Agent Sean archer going under the knife to acquire the likeness of Nicolas Cage’s mega-villain Castor Troy in order to stop an attack on LA. Unsurprisingly, things don’t go to plan. Travolta and Cage are a riot in their performance-swapping roles, while Woo delivers one of action cinema’s best climactic chases.  
**Kimberley Sheehan, bfi.org.uk**  

In John Woo’s most fully realised English-language film to date, two characters literally become their own worst enemies. The movie propels itself on this role-switching gimmick and on Woo’s trademark excess. It’s a star vehicle, a tenderly executed acting exercise, and a bone-crunching, hilarity-inducing example of what fans hoped would happen when the Hong Kong director’s cartoon pyrotechnics collided with Hollywood production values and matching budgets .

A sci-fi film wrapped around a Shakespearean romantic comedy of assumed identities and exchanged lovers, _Face/Off_ turns Woo into the ultimate crowd-pleaser, which, in this case, is not a bad thing. In sci-fi, medical experiments gone wrong lead to violence. In romantic comedy, mistaken identities resolve with domestic stasis. Here, we get both, and the result is as suspenseful as it is liberating. Can a person right his _doppelgänger_'s wrongs? It appears so. The script requires that its stars John Travolta and Nicolas Cage take over each other’s roles, which they do, gleefully sending up each other’s mannerisms. More importantly, the ensuing confusion leads to transformation and redemption for each man: as Archer, Castor makes the FBI drone care about his life. As Castor, Archer makes amends for the terrorist’s actions.

Like Woo’s Hong Kong work – as well as his two earlier English-language films _Hard Target_ and _Broken Arrow_ – _Face/Off_ is punctuated with gravity-teasing acrobatics, comic mayhem, and mindboggling sentimentality, which somehow manage not to cancel each other out. Cheeky scenes occasionally mock the outré nonsensicalness of it all (‘It’s like looking in a mirror, only not,’ says Travolta at one point). In one scene, a gun battle seethes around a little boy whose stereo headset is playing ‘Over the Rainbow’ while the grown-ups around him shoot it out in slow motion. In another, an actor announces the movie’s theme – ‘good versus evil’ – after parodying the posture of Christ on the Cross.

The secret of Woo’s appeal is that he takes all the familiar clichés and throws them back at us. Not only does he use, without an ounce of compunction, the hackneyed plot device of a lawman out for revenge against a villain who killed his son, but he stages this murder, in a breathtaking sepia-and-slow-motion style, on a merry-go-round, complete with sad calliope music. Trite, yes, but so over-the-top trite it makes a statement.

Woo seems determined to prove that any plot event can be turned into a flaming inferno, as in the overextended finale in which every piece of wood in an LA harbour, drenched or not, seems transmuted into a stick of self-combusting dynamite. With his dark, Deco-futuristic sets and set-pieces, Woo quotes from such sci-fi classics as _Metropolis_ (1926) and lesser-known works like _Seconds_ (a 1966 film in which men bored with their lives elect to have a face-swap) as well as, with its hall-of-mirrors shootout, such noir dramas as _Lady from Shanghai_ (1948). Woo drops in these allusions not just to show off but because he knows we also love the spot-the-influence game. Indeed, _Face/Off_ is, at heart, a high-budget B-movie with great B-movie moments. One of the finest is when Archer, residing in Troy’s body and confined to an Orwellian hellhole of a prison, learns that Troy has escaped and is impersonating him. Our hope for his salvation sinks even lower than his below-floor-level prison cell.

_Face/Off_’s screenplay, originally written for Sylvester Stallone and Arnold Schwarzenegger, leaves plenty of room for hamming it up. But it also contains the magic that works the spell that unravels a world in which one man inhabits another’s body. It helps that Cage and Travolta seem like separate ends of a large blob of taffy – a tug on one end affects the other. What’s amazing is that on such a big canvas, both Travolta and Cage set down their small moments with delicate strokes. ‘I’m Castor Troy,’ yelps Archer as he tentatively tries out his new identity. Then louder: ‘I’m Castor Troy.’ We watch him go through a baptism of fire and come out laughing all the way.  
**Robin Dougherty, _Sight and Sound_, November 1997**
<br>

**FACE/OFF**
_Director:_ John Woo  
_Production Companies:_ Paramount Pictures, Douglas-Reuther Productions, WCG Entertainment  
_Executive Producers:_ Michael Douglas, Steven Reuther, Jonathan D. Krane  
_Producers:_ David Permut, Barrie M. Osborne, Terence Chang, Christopher Godsick  
_Screenplay:_ Mike Werb, Michael Colleary  
_Director of Photography:_ Oliver Wood  
_Editors:_ Christian Wagner, Steven Kemper  
_Production Designer:_ Neil Spisak  
_Costume Designer:_ Ellen Mirojnick  
_Music:_ John Powell  
_Production Sound Mixer:_ David Ronne  
_Stunt Co-ordinator:_ Brian Smrz  
_Assistant Stunt Co-ordinator:_ Gregg Smrz  

**Cast**  
John Travolta _(Sean Archer)_  
Nicolas Cage _(Castor Troy)_  
Joan Allen _(Eve Archer)_  
Alessandro Nivola _(Pollux Troy)_  
Gina Gershon _(Sasha Hassler)_  
Dominique Swain _(Jamie Archie)_  
Nick Cassavetes _(Dietrich Hassler)_  
Harve Presnell _(Victor Lazarro)_  
Colm Feore _(Dr Malcolm Walsh)_  
John Carroll Lynch _(prison guard Walton)_  
C.C.H. Pounder _(Hollis Miller)_  
Robert Wisdom _(Tito Biondi)_  
Margaret Cho _(Wanda)_  
Jamie Denton _(Buzz)_  
Matt Ross _(Loomis)_  
Chris Bauer _(Dubov)_  
Myles Jeffrey _(Michael Archer)_  
David McCurley _(Adam Hassler)_  
Thomas Jane _(Burke Hicks)_  
Tommy J. Flanagan _(Leo)_  
Dana Smith _(Lars)_  
Romy Walthall _(Kimberly)_  
Paul Hipp _(Fitch)_  
Kirk Baltz _(Aldo)_  
Lauren Sinclair _(Agent Winters)_  
Ben Reed _(pilot)_  
Lisa Boyle _(Cindee)_  
Linda Hoffman _(Livia)_  
Danny Masterson _(Karl)_  
Father Michael Rocha _(priest)_  
Megan Paul _(hospital girl)_  
Mike Werb _(hospital dad)_  
Tom Reynolds _(LAPD cop)_  
Steve Hytner _(interrogating agent)_  
Carmen Thomas _(Valerie, reporter)_
John Bloom _(prison medical technician)_  
Walter Scott _(port police commander)_  
Brooke Leslie _(ER nurse)_  
Cam Brainard _(dispatcher)_  
David Warshofsky _(bomb leader)_  
John Neidlinger, Norm Compton _(bomb technicians)_  
Gregg Shawzin _(lock down guard)_  
Clifford Einstein _(restorative surgeon)_  
Marco Kyris _(recreation guard)_  
Tom Fridley _(prison guard)_  
Andrew Wallace _(altar boy)_  
Jacinto Rodriguez _(prisoner)_  
Chic Daniel _(FBI squad leader)_  
Laurence Walsh _(Walsh clinical nurse)_  

USA 1997  
140 mins  
35mm  
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMjU4NjUxMzAxLDE2Mjk0Nzg4NDddfQ==
-->