
**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

With its potent mix of mysterious scientific experiments, radioactive children, portents of dystopian doom and biker gang violence, _The Damned_ is a strange, sometimes uneven, but always compelling hybrid of science fiction and 1950s teenage gang exploitation. It is unquestionably one of the more unusual films to have emerged from the Hammer stable.

Despite misgivings about the original novel’s pulp content and science fiction theme (he had no interest in the genre), director Joseph Losey was drawn to the project by his belief that the novel spoke passionately about the irresponsible use of atomic power. Although Losey was unconvinced by the central premise, that the human organism could be radioactive and still able to survive, the finished film bears no trace of his doubts, and the tragic plight of the children is handled with moving sensitivity.

The introduction of Freya (a character not in the novel) also serves to introduce a science fiction theme, whether knowingly or not, first used by H.G. Wells in _Things to Come_, that of art (represented by Freya) in opposition to science (Bernard). While in _Things to Come_ the victory of the scientist over the artist represented progress as seen through the eyes of Wells, in _The Damned_, as elsewhere in postwar science fiction cinema, the opposite viewpoint prevails, with the scientist’s victory, symbolised by Bernard’s shooting of Freya, is presented as regressive and ultimately responsible for humanity’s impending demise.

Ironically, considering Losey’s antipathy towards the genre, _The Damned_ is at its strongest when it focuses on these very science fiction themes. It is weakest with the second element that attracted him to the project – the biker gang. The novel’s teenage gang subplot was retained to express Losey’s contention that the overt violence of society’s young was a corollary of the more covert violence of the Establishment. However, the director’s attempts to convey this by paralleling King and his gang with Bernard and his military subordinates feel forced and underdeveloped.

Regardless, _The Damned_ is one of the director’s most intriguing and undervalued works, and among Hammer’s finest and most haunting productions. Not that the studio saw it in this light at the time. Aghast at the downbeat result, they shelved the film for two years before granting it a release, and only then in a cut form.  
**John Oliver, BFI Screenonline**
<br><br>

**THE DAMNED (aka THESE ARE THE DAMNED)**<br>
_Director:_ Joseph Losey<br>
©: Swallow Productions, Ltd.<br>
_A_ Hammer Film _production_<br>
_Presented by:_ Columbia Pictures Corporation<br>
_Executive Producer:_ Michael Carreras<br>
_Producer:_ Anthony Hinds<br>
_Associate Producer:_ Anthony Nelson Keys<br>
_Production Manager:_ Don Weeks<br>
_Assistant Director:_ John Peverall<br>
_Continuity:_ Pamela Davies<br>
_Casting:_ Stuart Lyons<br>
_Screenplay:_ Evan Jones<br>
_Based on the novel_ The Children of Light _by:_ H.L. Lawrence<br>
_Director of Photography:_ Arthur Grant<br>
_Camera Operator:_ Anthony Heller<br>
_Editor:_ Reginald Mills<br>
_Sculpture:_ Frink<br>
_Wardrobe Supervisor:_ Molly Arbuthnot<br>
_Make-up Artist:_ Roy Ashton<br>
_Hair Stylist:_ Frieda Steiger<br>
_Music Composer:_ James Bernard<br>
_Musical Supervisor:_ John Hollingsworth<br>
_Sound Recordist:_ Jock May<br>
_Sound System:_ RCA<br>
_Sound Editor:_ Malcolm Cooke<br>
_Made_ _at:_ Bray Film Studios<br>

_uncredited_<br>
_Continuity:_ Tilly Day<br>
_Original Screenplay:_ Ben Barzman<br>
_Supervising Editor:_ James Needs<br>
_Production Designer:_ Bernard Robinson<br>
_Design Consultant:_ Richard MacDonald<br>
_Art Director:_ Don Mingaye<br>
_‘Black Leather Rock’ Arranged by:_ Douglas Gamley<br>

**Cast**<br>
MacDonald Carey _(Simon Wells)_<br>
Shirley Anne Field _(Joan)_<br>
Viveca Lindfors _(Freya Neilson)_<br>
Alexander Knox _(Bernard)_<br>
Oliver Reed _(King)_<br>
Walter Gotell _(Major Holland)_<br>
Brian Oulton _(Mr Dingle)_<br>
Kenneth Cope _(Sid)_<br>
James Villiers _(Captain Gregory)_<br>
Thomas Kempinski _(Ted)_<br>
Barbara Everest _(Miss Lamont)_<br>
Alan McClelland _(Mr Stuart)_<br>
James Maxwell _(Mr Talbot)_<br>
Rachel Clay _(Victoria)_<br>
Caroline Sheldon _(Elizabeth)_<br>
Rebecca Dignam _(Anne)_<br>
Siobhan Taylor _(Mary)_<br>
Nicolas Clay _(Richard)_<br>
Kit Williams _(Henry)_<br>
Christopher Witty _(William)_<br>
David Palmer _(George)_<br>
John Thompson _(Charles)_<br>

_uncredited_<br>
David Gregory, Anthony Valentine, Larry Martin, Leon Garcia, Jeremy Phillips  
_(Teddy Boy gang members)_<br>
Edward Harvey _(doctor)_<br>
Neil Wilson _(guard)_<br>
Fiona Duncan _(control room guard)_

UK-USA 1961©<br>
95 mins<br>
Digital<br>
<br><br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNjgxNzA5NTEyXX0=
-->