


_+ intro by Griffin Dunne_

As they make their way across the Yorkshire Moors, two backpacking US students are attacked by a ferocious creature. Only one of them survives and on arriving in London he realises that he has become cursed. John Landis’s classic film redefined the very idea of comedy horror – with much of the humour coming from Griffin Dunne’s hilarious performance – and features Rick Baker’s groundbreaking make-up effects.  
**bfi.org.uk**  

**Contemporary reviews**  
Sophomore humour appeals, if at all, simply because it is sophomoric; thus, there was no dickering with ‘sophistication’ in the John Landis team’s _Animal House_. Here, however, the material calls for a much lighter tread, so often has the ground been covered by filmmakers in hobnail boots.

Landis ends _An American Werewolf in London_ with a title card congratulating the Prince and Princess of Wales on their marriage; and hovering above the preceding action is a feeling that it is taking place in a cinematic country of the imagination not far removed from tourist Britain. Trafalgar Square, Tower Bridge, the Zoo and Piccadilly Circus are all used, and all perceptibly draw attention to themselves. What is refreshing, however, about the film’s ambience is that these British clichés are neither extended nor dwelt on. The Eros cinema in Piccadilly where the climactic transformation occurs is showing an authentic (though specially made) piece of homegrown tat titled _See You Next Wednesday_; the pub on the moors, filled with catatonic locals, has a sort of four-square reality, despite the pentangle scratched on the wall flanked by two immense prop-shop candles; the hospital employs an Indian porter, who is inevitably parodied but not, thankfully, in the usual oh-by-golly fashion. It takes perhaps a percipient outsider to bring off such a cockeyed view of Britain’s national monuments. Nurse Jenny Agutter is also something of a surprise, sustaining herself through the watches of the night (in what might have been a tiresome literary plant, but isn’t) with Mark Twain, and displaying both pity and love for the luckless David which just hints, intriguingly, at a deeper tragedy.

John Landis’ other achievement is to have successfully grafted on elements from his previous work. The young Americans are straight out of _Animal House_’s Faber College, at heart sublimely self-concerned and enthusiastically naive. Entering the Slaughtered Lamb, East Procter’s pub, they settle for a pot of tea when coldly informed that there isn’t anything to eat and cocoa isn’t served. Furthermore, this open quality – David Naughton first made his mark extolling a soft drink in an American TV advertisement – is carefully integrated with the plot. Jack returns ashen, with half his neck missing (at each appearance his putrefaction has advanced), and addresses David in his customary sing-song voice as if nothing really untoward had occurred: his death is a misfortune of the same order as his scuppered chances of bedding the girl he has been pursuing. The film is enhanced by uniformly careful casting in the secondary roles (John Woodvine as Hirsch, and Brian Glover as the chief stone-waller in the Slaughtered Lamb), and no one is allowed to run away with his tempting part. Mention must also be made of Rick Baker’s werewolf make-up (recently seen to great effect in _The Howling_): hair sprouts, hands elongate, claws shoot forth, and a backbone metamorphoses with the sort of effortless expertise that makes one, quite properly, forget the artistry.

John Pym, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, November 1981

A meeting or a lunch or a phone conversation with John Landis is an effective way of appreciating how self-confidence in Hollywood inevitably leads to success. Landis sports an old Beatle-style haircut and a thick beard and fires rapid, well-formed sentences at his interviewers, invariably before the question has been fully articulated. But Landis, who had to wait eleven years to make  
_An American Werewolf in London_, doesn’t strike one as an impatient man; he’s simply buoyed up with enthusiasm and it makes one wonder if a box-office catastrophe might prove too unsettling.

At 31, he’s slightly younger than Lucas, Spielberg and the generation of ‘movie brats’ and is quick to point out that, unlike them, he didn’t attend the UCLA Film School: ‘I just attended movies and then became a gofer – go for this, go for that – at 20th Century-Fox. Then I was a stuntman and an uncredited writer.’

Landis, who in a very short time has become one of the most bankable directors in Hollywood, acknowledges that studios and producers haven’t much idea of what audiences want to see. ‘You go to them with your idea, which might be really unusual, and all they care about is your track record. If you made money for someone else you can do the same for them.’ His first film, _Schlock_, which he describes as the cheapest and most self-indulgent movie ever made, turned a healthy profit though it remains unshown in Britain. His two campus comedies, _Kentucky Fried Movie_ and _National Lampoon’s Animal House_, were big successes in America. Of _The Blues Brothers_ Landis says, ‘I’ve grown tired of correcting journalists about the cost of the picture, but the fact is that it made a great deal of money and producers don’t seem scared of hiring me.’

_An American Werewolf in London_ has also proved a success with audiences in America and Europe. ‘In the States we benefited from two advertising campaigns. I wanted something classy, not the usual monster movie campaign, so we had the two American backpackers on the poster looking rather anxiously behind them. The film did poor business in New York and Detroit but did well in white, middle-class areas. It seems the Black audience stayed away because there were two ordinary white guys on the posters. Then we changed the design to the monster with his fangs and the Black audience poured in.’

Landis is understandably aggrieved by the sudden presence on the screen of full moons and hairy monsters stalking the city streets. One suspects that the current lycanthropic revival has more to do with the advances in special effects technology which dispense with lap-dissolves and other optical effects than any sociological causes or mythical yearnings. Landis is at pains to stress that he wrote the script when he was working on _Kelly’s Heroes_ and has hardly changed a thing, ‘except some of the dialogue people don’t say “groovy” any more.’ He was traumatised when he saw Ken Russell’s _Altered States_, which has a virtually identical sequence in which the hero returns to physical normality in a zoo, but he eventually decided to stick to the original, 11-year-old idea. As for the werewolf revival, Landis says, ‘It’s kind of alarming. I wonder what it means ... ‘

Landis is full of praise for Rick Baker’s special effects wizardry (and indeed the metamorphosis is a remarkable piece of engineering) and for the British crew who made the film. But he insists that making movies today is no different from what it was in the heyday of the studio system. ‘Although individual people like Cedric Gibbons and Hans Dreier might have vanished from the huge studio art departments, the organisation and infrastructure has survived. In Hollywood, whatever you might need for a scene, from a 1961 lilac Studebaker to a trained animal, it’s there the next morning ready for work. The city authorities are very co-operative for location work. In England the situation is different. We had to be extremely persistent to shoot in Piccadilly Circus, where you literally have to rely on the goodwill of the bobby on the beat, and even things like trained animals are difficult to get. You end up using one of the crew’s pets and waste hours until it barks on cue. There is a myth, though, that you can achieve better special effects in Britain than you can in Hollywood. The truth is that you can get them cheaper in Britain, which is why _Star Wars_ and _Superman_ were based here.’  
**Adrian Turner, _Sight and Sound_, Winter 1981-82**  
<br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbOTIyOTcxMzI0XX0=
-->