

<![endif]-->

_+ Intro_

Isobel Elsom gives a strong performance as a wife deprived by her child by having technically ‘deserted’ her husband, despite being morally justified in doing so. Her husband, who spent three years in prison for assaulting a man in a jealous rage, finds on release that his wife has fallen in love with his lawyer. The ‘Human’ Law enables him not only to abuse her with impunity, but to gain custody of the ensuing child. Maurice Elvey was having a good year, having just directed Hindle Wakes. This German co-production is in a similar, socially progressive vein, while featuring some impressionistic camera work in the German style.

bfi.org.uk

**Maurice Elvey** was born William Seward Folkard on 11 November 1887 in Stockton-on-Tees. He left home while still a child, seeking his fortune in London, where he worked variously as a kitchen hand and hotel pageboy, and later as an actor and stagehand. Ambitious and hard-working, Elvey rose quickly to directing and producing plays, establishing his own theatrical company before switching to films in 1912. He directed an array of comedies and dramas for the Motograph company and British and Colonial, most of them starring Elizabeth Risdon and Fred Groves, including the melodrama _Maria Marten: Or the Murder in the Red Barn_ (1913), an adaptation of Robert Louis Stevenson’s _The Suicide Club_ (1914), and a version of Shakespeare’s  
_As You Like It_, more plainly titled _Love in a Wood_ (1916).

By the end of the First World War, Elvey was making popular features in a variety of genres. Best known are his biographical films, of Florence Nightingale, Nelson, and Lloyd George. These reveal a Janus-faced director, working firmly in a tradition of Victorian hagiography, but clearly searching for contemporary relevance. They show some startlingly modern touches of associative editing and a facility for location and crowd scenes. Indeed it has been argued that if his _Life Story of David Lloyd George_ (1918) had not been suppressed for political reasons, British cinema may have taken a different direction. The rediscovery of this remarkable film has forced a re-appraisal both of British cinema in this period generally, and of Elvey’s (largely lost) output in particular.

By the early 1920s Elvey had become the chief director at Stoll, a studio that gained a reputation for swift, unimaginative literary adaptations, but was one of the first to model itself as a major producer with a distinctively national output. In 1924 he went to America, where he made five films for the Fox Film Corporation. He returned in 1925, putting his experience to especially good use on the psychologically sophisticated Anglo-German melodrama _Human Law/Tragödie Einer Ehe_ (1926), and _Hindle Wakes_ (1927), _Roses of Picardy_ (1927), _Palais de Dance_ (1928) and _High Treason_ (1929): films that display an awareness of visual storytelling and spectacle often lacking in his later work. _Hindle Wakes_ is a particularly successful example of Elvey’s blend of realism, melodrama and sense of location.

During the 1930s Elvey’s tireless energy led him to work across the spectrum of British production, on ‘quota quickies’ as well as on ambitious productions such as _The Tunnel_ for Gaumont-British. At Ealing he made Gracie Fields’ first film, _Sally in Our Alley_ (1931) – notably more realistic and downbeat in tone than her later vehicles – and subsequently _This Week of Grace and Love, Life and Laughter_. During the Second World War he worked with Leslie Howard on the critically praised _The Gentle Sex_ (1943) and took over direction on _The Lamp Still Burns_ (1943) after Howard’s death. _Medal for the General_, his wartime production for British National, and his big-budget post-war melodrama _Beware of Pity_ are also worthy of consideration. Elvey continued to direct a wide variety of dramas and comedies until failing eyesight forced his retirement in 1957.

With such a massive output, and working at such speed, it is inevitable that many of Elvey’s films have a perfunctory flavour. But the best of his work, particularly from the silent period, reveals a sympathetic and imaginative craftsman whose role in shaping British cinema has been unjustly neglected in favour of more flashy and less experienced contemporaries. He died in Brighton on 28 August 1967.  
**Lawrence Napper, BFI Screenonline, screenonline.org.uk**  
<br>
<![endif]-->

**HUMAN LAW (AKA** **TRAGÖDIE EINER EHE)**

_Director_: Maurice Elvey  
_Production Companies_: Astra-National Productions, Maxim-Film-Gesellschaft  
_Screenplay_: Ruth Goetz, Maurice Krol  
_Original Novel_: E. Ehlert  
_Photography_: Mutz Greenbaum  
_Art Directors_: Ernest Stern, Artur Günther

**Cast**  
Isobel Elsom _(Louise Radcliffe)_  
Alfred Abel _(Radcliffe)_  
Paul Richter _(Mason)_  
Ernst Verebes  
Frieda Richard  
Eduard von Winterstein  

UK-Germany 1927  
91 mins  
35mm  

With live piano accompaniment  
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTk0NDIwNzAxOF19
-->