
Inspired by Jill Chen Louis’s book _The Cola Wars_, John Pilger’s _Burp! Pepsi v Coke in the Ice Cold War_ tells the story of the struggle between ‘those giants of carbonation and regurgitation, Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola’ – and how the two multinationals have influenced American politics.

Standing in front of a war monument in Washington, his voice heavy with irony, Pilger says, ‘This is a film about a world war. A war which in all my years as a correspondent has somehow escaped my attention. It is a war fought in more than 100 countries, regardless of ideology, in communist and capitalist countries, in Muslim, Buddhist and Christian countries. It’s a war that has directly involved President Eisenhower, President Johnson, President Nixon, President Carter, Chiang Kai-shek, Mao Zedong, the Dalai Lama, Mr Khrushchev and Father Christmas… One side claims to have captured China. The other side says that it has taken Russia.’

Pilger begins with the invention of Coca-Cola in the days after the American Civil War. ‘Coke’ claimed a ‘secret formula’ – false rumours that it might contain cocaine contributed to its mystique. This was followed by Pepsi’s ‘magical ingredients’. As the companies grew, their success was the result of an innovative franchise system that spread to 150 countries and to advertising campaigns that associated a product of basically sugar and water with ‘good times’. Coke could claim, with some truth, to have conceived one of the modern images of Santa Claus – jovial and plump, and drinking a Coke. By the 1980s, a landmark Congressional inquiry had identified soft drinks as the primary cause of obesity.

During the Second World War, Coca-Cola shipped whole bottling plants to the front line, with the US taxpayer – via the War Department – picking up the bill. Coke dispensers were installed in tanks, submarines, even fighter planes.

The Cold War presented an opportunity to capture markets long closed to American consumer goods. Coca-Cola was preferred in communist Poland, it claimed, to the ‘ideologically pure’ vodka, while Pepsi aligned itself with the infamous ‘Red baiting’ Senator Joe McCarthy, who called sugar rationing ‘anti-American’. Film star Joan Crawford, wife of Al Steele, Pepsi’s chairman in the 1950s, became a ‘Pepsi ambassador’.

President Jimmy Carter ensured Coca-Cola’s success in China, which the company ‘recognised’ before the United States had established diplomatic relations with the People’s Republic. Throughout much of his career, former Vice-President and President-to-be Richard Nixon was bankrolled by Pepsi-Cola, especially on his world travels, which took him behind the ‘Iron Curtain’. Thanks largely to its relationship with Nixon, Pepsi claimed what it regarded as the Cold War ‘prize’ – Russia.

_Burp!_ may claim the distinction of being the only film in which the heads of both Coke and Pepsi agree to appear and be interviewed, though separately. Donald RKeough, president of the Coca-Cola Company, leaves not a dry eye when he tells Pilger that he goes to bed every night believing his business adds ‘a little brightness to life’ and gives the example of an imaginary impoverished young woman in Colombia buying a drink of Coke. ‘For a moment,’ he says, ‘she’s got her hand around the same thing that the president of that country is drinking or that people of every walk of life drink. And I think that’s terribly valid.’  
**johnpilger.com**

**Flying the Flag – Arming the World: 1994 press notes**  
Britain’s most profitable industry is not cars or whisky, but arms – a multibillion-pound business developing, producing and exporting some of the world’s most dangerous killing machines. In _Flying the Flag – Arming the World_, John Pilger and David Munro lift the lid on the nation’s military economy, which employs one in ten British workers and accounts for half of all research and development spending. The programme was transmitted as part of _The War Machine_, ITV’s first ever themed week, exploring the international arms trade.

Pilger reports that the Ministry of Defence – despite newspaper headlines about deep cuts – is still the industry’s biggest customer, receiving £20 billion-plus of taxpayers’ money each year, although a new threat to replace Communism has yet to be found. But huge supplies of fighter planes, tanks, guns and bombs are also sold to poor and developing countries, often run by dictatorships with appalling human rights records, giving Britain a 20 per cent share of the world arms market, second only to the United States.

Pilger says: ‘As the Scott Arms-for-Iraq Inquiry has revealed, the British Government will send any amount of arms to a dictator, regardless of his appalling human rights record and breach of government guidelines.’

Pilger interviews Denis Healey, who as Labour defence secretary in 1966 set up the Defence Sales Organisation to exploit the commercial opportunities for arms exports worldwide. But it was under Margaret Thatcher’s premiership – and often personal involvement – that the biggest deals were struck.

The programme examines multimillion-pound arms sales to Saudi Arabia and Iraq and includes extraordinary interviews with highly-placed sources from intelligence and diplomatic circles about the secret workings of the government departments and manufacturers involved in the deals, as well as the middleman – who made money from them.

Pilger and Munro also travel to the Paris arms fair, which they liken in style to the Ideal Home Exhibition – with smooth-talking salesmen, glossy brochures, promotions women and special deals for bulk buys.

Pilger says: ‘At the stand of one French company, a salesman described to me the workings of a “wonderful” new bomblet or grenade smaller than a grapefruit which, upon impact, breaks into millions of fragments, saturating the “objective”.

‘It reminded me of my time as a war correspondent in Vietnam when a less refined version of the dart bomb was first tested by the Americans, leaving many civilians including children to die a slow, agonising death from internal injuries.

‘The only pleasure I get from such an arms fair is in helping the salesmen to relieve their verbal constipation. They have the greatest difficulty in saying the words “people” or “kill” and words like “maim” and “suffering” appear to have no place in their vocabulary.’

He adds: ‘This film is not just about the arms business, it is also the story of the Thatcher Years – of the contempt shown for the people and Parliament, of lying, of an obsession with secrecy and corruption – all of it conducted in our name, with our money.’  
**Central Independent Television**
<br><br>

**BURP! PEPSI V COKE IN THE ICE COLD WAR**<br>
_Director_: Alan Lowery<br>
_Reporter:_ John Pilger  
_Production Company_:  Central Independent Television  
_Producer_: Nicholas Claxton<br>
_Production Assistant:_ Julie Stoner<br>
_Film Research:_ Raye Farr, Sue Sudbury  
_Camera_: John Varnish<br>
_Rostrum Camera:_ Duncan Holloway<br>
_Graphics:_ Chris Bent, Ivor Weir  
_Editors_: Paul Cleary, Hazel Sansom<br>
_Assistant Editor:_ Hazel Sansom  
_Sound_: John Marshall<br>
_Dubbing Mixer:_ Colin Martin

ITV tx 22.5.1984<br>
53 mins

**FLYING THE FLAG – ARMING THE WORLD**<br>
_Director/Producer_: David Munro  
_Written & Presented by:_ John Pilger<br>
_Production Company_:  Central Independent Television<br>
_Production Accountant:_ Andy Ritchie<br>
_Production Secretary:_ Tracy Whitehouse<br>
_Senior Researcher:_ David Boardman  
_Photography_: Kees ’t Hooft, Bob Bolt, David Munro<br>
_Still Photography:_ John Garrett  
_Rostrum Photography & Graphics:_ Frameline<br>
_Editor_: Joe Frost<br>
_On-line Editor:_ Chris Reynolds<br>
_Archive:_ ITN<br>
_Archive Research:_ Janet Rayner<br>
_Titles:_ The Look<br>
_Title Music:_ Steven Faux<br>
_‘The Powers That Be’ courtesy of:_ Roger Waters<br>
_Sound:_ Mel Marr, Alan James<br>
_Dubbing Mixer:_ Paul Roberts<br>
_Consultants:_ Paul Lashmar, David Hellier<br>
_Special Thanks:_ Peter Ward, Bruce Kent, John Reed, David Bull, Dr M.A.S. Al-Massari, Campaign Against the Arms Trade, Ben Jackson & Harriet Lamb – WDM, John Sweeney, Richard Norton-Taylor, Dr Paul Dunne, Robin Ballantine

ITV tx 15.11.1994<br>
50 mins<br>
<br><br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTk1Mjk2OTIyNF19
-->