
In 1977, a heavily revised script optioned by Twentieth Century-Fox entitled _Alien_ went through the hands of several Hollywood directors. Peter Yates passed on it. Robert Aldrich passed on it. The veteran Jack Clayton, director of the brilliant ghost story _The Innocents_ (1961), dismissed it as ‘a stupid monster movie’. The Screen Directors Guild then went on strike. Eventually, the English director Ridley Scott was signed up in February 1978. Scott had a long track record in advertising but not so much experience in studio film production. He had released his first feature film, _The Duellists_, in 1977, which was not strongly promoted by Paramount. It had shown in precisely one cinema in Los Angeles.

When _Alien_ opened in May 1979, with a saturation ad campaign, it was to lukewarm reactions. In _The_ _New York Times_, Vincent Canby warned that it provided ‘shocks of a most mundane kind’ and called it ‘an extremely small, rather decent movie of its modest kind, set inside a large, extremely fancy physical production’. The _Monthly Film Bulletin_ praised only its ‘commercial astuteness’, complaining at its ‘moribund’ narrative which ‘seems to dispense with dramatic structure altogether’ and mourned its general ‘lack of invention’. James Monaco in _Sight & Sound_ thought it had little intellectual content and ‘has no other reason for being except to work its effects on audiences’.

This is not a promising start for what became one of the most potent myths of modern cinema. _Alien_ did in fact do well commercially: it was the fourth largest grossing film of 1979 (earning $60 million in America). But texts give birth to myths once stories escape the bounds of their local plot and float free from their origins. Gothic fictions have done this continually across the centuries: Shelley’s _Frankenstein_, Stevenson’s _Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde_ or Bram Stoker’s _Dracula_ have each provided powerful icons, condensing something about what it means to be human in the modern world with such incredible economy and force that they broke their literary bonds and became embedded in the general culture. _Alien_ undoubtedly has the same force as its Gothic forebears, bursting out of its modest origins and coiling itself around our darkest imaginings.

What was it in this creaky Old Dark House in Space, this interstellar slasher, that gave it the evolutionary advantage to survive the late-1970s glut of horror hybrids? The story of how _Alien_ came together in the form it did is a series of glorious accidents, a chance result of arguments and compromises that would surely have wrecked a hundred other films. Cinema, like myth, rarely springs from a single intent, and _Alien_ was moulded, at every level, by the forces of something collective, beyond itself, that pushed it into a shape that nevertheless felt instantly necessary and preordained.

For me, it is a boundary fiction, a film that rests on a number of cusps. These kinds of films do a lot of cultural work for us, negotiating limits and meanings. It is why we keep returning to them. _Alien_ is a late-1970s studio film, given the green light by a studio keen to repeat the success of _Star Wars_ (1977), yet it retains a late whiff of that independent spirit of the New Hollywood and even a dash of European art-house sensibility. An efficient thriller plot, honed by tough-guy director Walter Hill, was ornamented to baroque excess by the extraordinary concentration of artistic talents that came to work on the film. Low trappings came with high style.

After _Alien_ it is difficult to recall how innovative was its appearance in the liminal zone between science fiction and Gothic horror. In 1980, the first serious academic study of science-fiction cinema, Vivian Sobchack’s _Screening Space_, struggled to parse the difference of these genres, recognising that there was ‘a limbo of films between horror and science fiction’, films featuring BEMs (Bug-Eyed Monsters) that were abjected as ridiculous by purists in both camps. For a long time, science-fiction criticism premised the virtues of the genre on it being scientific, cognitive, future-oriented and sublime, explicitly contrasting it against the lowly Gothic for being religious, over-emotional, tyrannised by the past, and always willing to pull the sublime down into the monstrous and grotesque. Science fiction deals with future possibilities, the Gothic with the dread inheritance of the past, the doom of repetition. But what happens when a film overthrows these conceptual oppositions and entirely fuses the genres? _Alien_ offers a vision of an industrial future where the technological sublime is begrimed by the terrors of the deep ancestral past: this felt very new. It taunts the shiny NASA narrative of the Apollo missions in their dying days. It is the dark shadow of the science-fiction spectacular of _Star Trek: The Motion Picture_, creeping up behind it in the blockbuster charts of 1979 with new kinds of cinematic intensity and affect.

It is because of this location between genres that _Alien_ launches its grand theme: an investigation of the boundaries of what it means to be human in a hostile universe teeming with other kinds of biological and artificial life. Anxious fantasies of origins and sexual reproduction are at the core of the film’s horrific appeal, as they were in so many horror films of the 1970s. But _Alien_’s science-fictional Gothic expands the palate from demon babies and toddler Antichrists, brooding more expansively on evolutionary time, the biological inheritances not just of the past but the monstrous possibilities of parallel alien development or future mutation. These threats hem in the human element in an uncertain zone in the spectrum of being. The fragile boundaries of the body will be menaced from within and without.

Of course, it is _that_ scene, the birth of the alien, which exists like a post-traumatic flashback in our culture, tempting us back to revisit the horror again and again. The franchise chases this inaugural shock, hoping to tap its primal energy. But twists in the expectations of how gendered human beings act are also amongst the most interesting things about _Alien_: the abject male birthing, the feminisation of the hero, Ripley. This is not all: _Alien_ actually offers a whole spectrum of beings, from the primordial creature they disturb on the asteroid to the computerised Mother that directs their every living breath, to the android that hides in their midst and computes actions to the dictates of an unseen, inhuman corporation. And this is to say nothing of the cunning role of Jones, the ship’s cat.

If _Alien_ is about the failure of community or co-existence with others (survival can be conceived only in terms of do-or-die), then this is because the film, shot in 1978 and released in 1979, is also on the cusp of utterly different eras. It was first given a limited release in late May 1979, only a matter of weeks after the election of Margaret Thatcher in Britain, and given a full release in November 1979 just as the Republican Ronald Reagan won the American presidential election. This was a moment of decisive shift from the economic and political crises of the 1970s to the rise of what would come to be known as neoliberalism. Although it cannot know this about itself, _Alien_ registers this epochal shift with ominous portents.  
**Roger Luckhurst, _Alien_ (BFI Film Classics, Palgrave Macmillan/Bloomsbury, 2014)**
<br><br>

**Alien**<br>

_Directed by_: Ridley Scott<br>

©: Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corporation<br>

_Production Company_: Brandywine Productions<br>

_Made by_: Twentieth Century-Fox Productions Ltd<br>

_Executive Producer_: Ronald Shusett<br>

_Produced by_: Gordon Carroll,  
David Giler, Walter Hill<br>

_Associate Producer_: Ivor Powell<br>

_Production Executive_: Mark Haggard<br>

_Production Manager_: Garth Thomas<br>

_Production Accountant_: Bill Finch<br>

_1st Assistant Directors_: Paul Ibbetson,  
Raymond Becket<br>

_Assistant Director_: Steve Harding<br>

_Assistant to Director_: Sandy Molloy<br>

_Trainee Assistant Director_: Bob Jordan<br>

_Continuity_: Kay Fenton<br>

_USA Casting_: Mary Goldberg<br>

_UK Casting:_ Mary Selway<br>

_Screenplay by_: Dan O’Bannon, Walter Hill<br>

_Screenplay_: David Giler *<br>

_Story by_: Dan O’Bannon, Ronald Shusett<br>

_Director of Photography_: Derek Vanlint<br>

_Miniature Effects Director of Photography_:  
Denys Ayling<br>

_Camera Focus_: Adrian Biddle, Colin Davidson<br>

_Lighting Gaffer_: Ray Evans<br>

_Key Grip_: Jimmy Walters<br>

_Electronics/Video Co-ordinator_: Dick Hewitt

_Stills_: Bob Penn

_Matte Artist_: Ray Caple

_Special Effects Supervisors_:  
Brian Johnson, Nick Allder

_‘Alien’ Design_: H.R. Giger

_Small ‘Alien’ Forms Co-designed/Made by_:  
Roger Dicken

_‘Alien’ Head Effects Created by_:  
Carlo Rambaldi, Clinton Cavers

_Additional ‘Alien’ Mechanics_: Carlo Demarchis

_Additional ‘Alien’ Mechanics_: David Watling

_Floor Effects Supervisor_: Allan Bryce

_Supervising Model Makers_:  
Martin Bower, Bill Pearson

_Supervising Modellers_: Peter Voysey, Eddie Butler

_Special Graphic Effects by_: Bernard Lodge

_Film Editors_: Terry Rawlings, Peter Weatherley

_1st Assistant Editors_: Les Healey,  
Peter Culverwell, Bridget Reiss

_Assistant Film Editors_: Peter Baldock,  
Maureen Lyndon

_Production Designer_: Michael Seymour

_Visual Design Consultant_: Dan O’Bannon

_Art Directors_: Les Dilley, Roger Christian

_Assistant Art Directors_: Jonathan Amberston,  
Benjamín Fernández

_Set Decorator_: Ian Whittaker_  
Concept Artists_: Jean ‘Moëbius’ Giraud,  
Chris Foss, Ron Cobb

_Property Masters_: Dave Jordan, Jill Quertier

_Construction Manager_: Bill Welch

_Costume Designer_: John Mollo

_Wardrobe Supervisor_: Tiny Nicholls

_Make-up Supervisor_: Tommy Manderson

_Make-up_: Pat Hay

_Hairdresser_: Sarah Monzani

_Title Design_: Steve Frankfurt Communications,

R/Greenberg Associates, Tony Silver Films

_Titles_: Filmfex Animation Services

_Music by_: Jerry Goldsmith

_Conducted by_: Lionel Newman

_Music Editor_: Bob Hathaway

_Production Sound Mixer_: Derrick Leather

_Re-recording Mixer_: Bill Rowe

_Dolby Sound Consultant_: Max Bell

_Re-recording Assistant_: Ray Merrin

_Sound Editor_: Jim Shields

_Dialogue Editor_: Bryan Tilling

_Stunt Co-ordinator_: Roy Scammell

_Stunt Work_: Eddie Powell

_‘Jones’ Trained by_: Animals Unlimited

_Studio_: Shepperton Studios

_Cast:_

Tom Skerritt _(Captain Dallas)_

Sigourney Weaver _(Ripley)_

Veronica Cartwright _(Lambert)_

Harry Dean Stanton _(Brett)_

John Hurt _(Kane)_

Ian Holm _(Ash)_

Yaphet Kotto _(Parker)_

Bolaji Badejo _(‘Alien’)_

Helen Horton _(voice of ‘Mother’)_

USA 1979©

116 mins

Digital 4K

* Uncredited
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE5NjExMjM3MDhdfQ==
-->