
Meet Vic Dakin, your everyday London businessman and murderous, sadistic gang leader: the sort of diamond geezer who would shake your hand prior to nailing your head to a passing milk float. Vic loves his dear old mum and would only ever harm other criminals/anyone who crossed him/random passers-by. His more innocent hobbies include complaining about the decline in British morality – ‘We should never have abolished the National Service’ – and a part-time sado-masochistic gay relationship. Any resemblance between Vic Dakin and Ronnie Kray was quite deliberate.

1971’s _Get Carter_, directed by Mike Hodges, enjoys a cult afterlife and is now regarded as one of the defining crime dramas of its era. The same year’s _Villain_, however, quickly vanished into a shadowy existence of late-night television airings. Based on James Barlow’s excellent 1968 crime novel _Burden of Proof_ and adapted for the big screen by Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais – then famed for BBC’s _The Likely Lads_ (1965-66) – _Villain_ boasts more than its fair share of quotable dialogue: ‘Stupid punters. Telly all the week, screw the wife Saturday’.

The film’s casting coup was Richard Burton as Vic. When _Villain_ entered production in 1970, Burton’s star was on the wane, but the part allows him to experiment with a Cockney accent that varies between early Sid James and vintage Dick Van Dyke, and to eat the scenery at every conceivable opportunity, albeit not without a sense of humour. Burton portrays Dakin as a very house-proud gangster, who favours an eminently respectable Rover P5B Coupe as everyday transport.

As with _Get Carter_, the prevailing mood is one of bleak depression, and Michael Tucher’s direction captures a realm of cheap and seedy violence. The film takes every opportunity to display Vic’s sheer brutality, not least when he beats up James Cossins’ bitter office manager, who acts as his inside man in the wages snatch. _Villain_ underwhelmed at the box office, partly because of its utterly unglamorous approach to on-screen violence but also because of Burton’s central role; UK memories of the recently incarcerated Krays may have been fresh, but they were less known elsewhere. But it remains a film that is in dire need of reappraisal. Had Dakin survived to the present day, he would probably have published several volumes of self-justifying memoirs glorifying violence and thuggery. And, perhaps, made the odd ironic cameo in a ‘Brit-Gangster’ flick of the 1990s.  
**Andrew Roberts, BFI Screenonline**

In September 1970 Burton and Taylor were in London for him to make a British gangster film, _Villain_, for Anglo-EMI. He played a thug with homosexual tendencies, receiving no fee in advance but only a percentage of profits. ‘He did it for his cab fare,’ says a producer. In fact he did it for expenses in cash and kind worth around $80,000. _Villain_ was good in places in a modest, B-picture manner, but Burton added nothing to it except his name in first place, the same size as the title. It might have been any competent actor with raddled features who could snarl in guttural Cockney. The _New York Times_ kept watch on him while filming. He was in a hotel thirty miles out of London, suffering from a cold. He had woken at two in the morning, he said, and heard voices saying ‘Richard, Richard’. The writer, Bernard Weinraub, noted ‘an unmistakable aura of stardom’, but Burton sounded tired. ‘It seems fairly ridiculous’, he said, ‘for someone of 45 or 50 to be learning words written by other people, most of which are bad, to make a few dollars.’ There were still challenges. His ego, he said, would force him to play Lear and Macbeth. Nobody asked when. ‘Fame is pernicious,’ said Burton. ‘So is money.’ The reporter saw his hand shake when he lit a cigarette, and wrote, ‘Despite the bravura voice and style, he appears, at this point, oddly vulnerable, even frail. Somehow, the shadows of the past have deepened. The drinker, the lover, the celebrity, have flickered into a surprisingly weary figure.’  
**Paul Ferris, _Richard Burton_ (Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1981)**

**A contemporary review**  
After _Performance_ and _Get Carter_, there appear to be few atrocities left unexplored in the British underworld. But where the latter’s determinedly ‘unsentimental’ approach resulted in an automaton hero and a story-line loose enough to accommodate a maximum number of picturesque deaths in striking locations, _Villain_’s superficial nastiness (largely a matter of louder and better synchronised punches) conceals a relatively old-fashioned approach to the genre. The story (from James Barlow’s novel _Burden of Proof_) is tidily plotted; the locations are functional; the bad characters are human enough to elicit sympathy at their downfall; and the film whirrs smoothly into top gear for its last-ditch climax, complete with curtain line. (‘Who are you looking at?’ yells Burton to the audience as he is led away handcuffed.)

Though violence and homosexuality put a Seventies gloss on what is essentially a Fifties-style ‘well-made film’ (of the school of Dearden and Guillermin), the impression is still cosily humanist: Dakin is a vicious thug but loves his mother; Lowis is a coward but suffers from ulcers. It all makes an unnerving contrast to _Get Carter_’s mechanised and unsuffering hero, and the sentimentality tends to undermine a film that is otherwise ‘well-made’ in the best sense. The performances are uniformly good; the screenplay, by Ian La Frenais and Dick Clement, is witty and laconic; and Michael Tuchner’s direction is thoroughly efficient, with the robbery itself and the bungled getaway brilliantly staged. Perhaps the next British gangster film will locate its hoodlums credibly somewhere between automatism and homeliness.  
**Nigel Andrews, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, July 1971**
<br><br>

**Villain**<br>

_Directed by:_ Michael Tuchner<br>

©: Anglo-EMI Film Distributors Ltd.<br>

_an_ Anglo-EMI _film_<br>

_a_ Kastner/Ladd/Kanter _picture_<br>

_Production Company:_ Winkast Film Productions *<br>

_Presented by:_ Nat Cohen<br>

_Executive Producer:_ Elliott Kastner<br>

_Produced by:_ Alan Ladd Jr, Jay Kanter<br>

_Production Associate for EMI:_ Richard Du Vivier *<br>

_Production Supervisor:_ Gavrik Losey<br>

_Production Manager:_ James M. Crawford<br>

_Production Assistant:_ Joyce Herlihy<br>

_Producer’s Assistant:_ George Pappas<br>

_Assistant Director:_ Kip Gowans<br>

_2nd Assistant Directors:_ David Wimbury,  
Nicholas Hippisley Coxe *<br>

_Continuity:_ Ene Watts<br>

_Casting:_ Rose Tobias Shaw *<br>

_Screenplay:_ Dick Clement, Ian La Frenais<br>

_From the novel ‘The Burden of Proof’ by:_  
James Barlow<br>

_Adapted by:_ Al Lettieri<br>

_Director of Photography:_ Christopher Challis<br>

_Camera Operator:_ John Harris<br>

_Editor:_ Ralph Sheldon<br>

_Art Director:_ Maurice Carter<br>

_Set Decorator:_ Andrew Campbell<br>

_Wardrobe Supervisor:_ Jimmy Smith *<br>

_Make Up:_ Alec Garfath<br>

_2nd Make-up:_ Ron Berkeley *<br>

_Hairdresser:_ Allan McKeown<br>

_Titles by:_ National Screen Service Ltd.<br>

_Filmed in:_ Panavision<br>

_Colour by:_ Technicolor<br>

_Music Composed by:_ Jonathan Hodge<br>

_Arrangements by:_ Steve Gray<br>

_Sound Recordist:_ John Bramall<br>

_Dubbing Mixer:_ Len Abbott

_Recorded at:_ EMI-MGM Elstree Studios

_Dubbing Editor:_ Don Sharpe

_Studio:_ Goldhawk Studios *

_Cast:_

Richard Burton _(Vic Dakin)_

Ian McShane _(Wolfe Lissner)_

Nigel Davenport _(Bob Matthews)_

Donald Sinden _(Gerald Draycott)_

T.P. McKenna _(Frank Fletcher)_

Joss Ackland _(Edgar Lowis)_

Fiona Lewis _(Venetia)_

Cathleen Nesbitt _(Mrs Dakin)_

Elizabeth Knight _(Patti)_

Colin Welland _(Tom Binney)_

John Hallam _(Terry)_

Tony Selby _(Duncan)_

Del Henney _(Webb)_

James Cossins _(Brown)_

Ben Howard _(Henry)_

Anthony Sagar _(Danny)_

Clive Francis _(Vivian)_

Stephen Sheppard _(Benny Thompson)_

Brook Williams _(Kenneth)_

Wendy Hutchinson _(Mrs Lowis)_

Michael Robbins _(Barzun)_

Sheila White _(Veronica)_

Cheryl Hall _(Judy)_

Shirley Cain _(Mrs Matthews)_

Lindy Miller _(Gilly)_

Godfrey James _(car lot manager)_

Bonita Thomas _(strip dancer)_

Leslie Schofield _(detective-constable)_

Paul Hardwick, Michael Munn *

UK 1971© 98 mins  35mm  * Uncredited
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTgwMTk3ODc3OF19
-->