
_+ pre-recorded intro by Tang Shu Shuen_

How radical Tang Shu Shuen’s period melodrama must have seemed in 1970, arriving in a Hong Kong film industry dominated by kung fu and opera films, and still a decade or so away from the New Wave it anticipates. Tang, who was born in Taiwan and studied in the US, was something of an outsider in the Hong Kong industry, even before her gender is taken into account, but she was one of the most original of any filmmakers active at the time (and the bravest – her follow-up, 1974’s covertly-shot _China Behind_, was one of the first films to address the excesses of the Cultural Revolution).

Set during the early Qing dynasty, _The Arch_ focuses on a respected widow whose life is disrupted when a soldier is billeted to the house she shares with her daughter. The emotional turmoil and social disapproval aroused by the ensuing love triangle is vividly suggested in an intensely subjective mode that’s been described as a mix of Mizoguchi, Alain Resnais and costume drama. The black-and-white cinematography by Subrata Mitra (DP on Satyajit Ray’s _Apu Trilogy_ and others) is achingly beautiful, but it’s how the measured pace is often disrupted by rapid _nouvelle vague_-inspired editing (by Les Blank!) – employing freeze frames, jump cuts, dissolves and montage – as well as the unusual use of traditional instrumentation, voiceover narration and sound design that really make _The Arch_ spellbindingly unique.  
**James Bell, _Sight and Sound_, October 2015**

**Director’s notes**  
_The Arch_ departs from the traditional ways of filmmaking in China and attempts to go back to the method by which Chinese characters (word-symbols) were originally constructed. It is not surprising that this method corresponds closely with the theories of the western concepts of cinema art. For each Chinese character is a picture in itself which conveys an idea, a feeling and a romance of its own.

The story of _The Arch_ is subject to many interpretations. Some see in it a conflict between the force of tradition and the force of natural human feelings; some see in it a story of the irony of fate; some see in it the psychological development of a character, and some see in it another love triangle. Whatever the interpretation may be, the story is about a woman tormented and the effect of her inner conflicts upon the other characters. That to me, as the author-director, is the interesting thing.

I see in Madam Tung the helplessness of all of us. She exemplifies the ludicrousness of mankind, the futility of morality, the futility of intelligence, the futility of knowledge and of ethics – the fact that we cannot escape anguish and torment.

For it is pointless to conclude what is right or best for her to do. Her suffering comes not as the consequence of the choice she makes, for one way or the other one lives on. The ludicrousness is that we are forever forced to choose between insidious choices, significant to us because of the inherent weakness of human nature: the vulnerability of our feelings, the limitedness of our wisdom, and our inability to transcend our experiences – our lack of the  
cosmic sense.

Every character in _The Arch_ has good intentions, and is without a pronounced tragic flaw. But the story does not turn out to be a happy one. And that is our lot. So what is there to offer as a comfort but tolerance of each other’s weaknesses and compassion for each other’s pain.

For a first directing project, _The Arch_ is extremely complicated material. But because of its psychological nature, it offers a great deal of freedom for cinematic expressions and challenges creative use of the medium. I attempted to present this dramatic story in a simple detached manner, hoping only to show how similar are people, their needs, their feelings, and the predicaments they face, everywhere in the world. And how time will never change this.
<br>

**Praise for ‘The Arch’**

‘_The Arch_ is one of those rare films which rekindle my hope that cinema is capable of being an art form.’ – Edward Albee

‘_The Arch_ by Shu Shuen is one of the most charming films I have ever seen. It is a kind of morality play executed in the spirit of Old China. Its serene mood of majestic tranquillity gives us a remarkable insight into a strange ancient world. Its pictures of breathtaking beauty and the action of its leading lady is simply superb. I am eagerly looking forward to Miss Tang’s next film.’ – Fritz Lang

‘I was so deeply moved by _The Arch_, aesthetically and humanely. Shu Shuen has achieved a film of poetic beauty, and in this particular era of explicit and vulgarised sensuality this treatment of contained passion is more powerful, reaches an intensity quite rare in films … I admire a woman so young to have completed such a refined and enduring classique.’ – Anaïs Nin

‘One leaves the theatre feeling grateful, feelings assuaged, feeling that there truly is such a thing as human brotherhood and sisterhood, that passion stems from the soul and not the guts – in short, that there is hope for a better, brighter, cleaner world.’ – Henry Miller

‘Miss Shu Shuen reaches straight out for an enormous theme in her first work. In _The Arch_ she gives us a film of great beauty and maturity, an astonishing debut.’ – Karel Reisz

‘A film with many magnificent scenes. Interesting direction … A promising talent.’ – Josef von Sternberg

**Production notes**

Suggested further reading: Ching Yau, _Filming Margins: Tang Shu Shuen, A Forgotten Hong Kong Woman Director_ (Hong Kong University Press, 2004)
<br><br>

**The Arch** Dong fu ren<br>

_Director:_ Tang Shu Shuen _aka_ Cecile Tang<br>

_Production_ _Company_: Film Dynasty Productions<br>

_Executive_ _Producer_: Paul D. Lee _aka_ Li Chaozong<br>

_Producer_: Tang Shu Shuen<br>

_Production_ _Supervisor_: Chiu Ding _aka_ Zhao Ding<br>

_Production_ _Assistant_: Chen Zhe<br>

_Assistant_ _Director_ _(Interiors):_  
Yih Chia-tai _aka_ Ye Jiatai<br>

_Assistant_ _Director_ _(Exteriors):_  
Tsao Wen _aka_ Cao Wen<br>

_Post_ _Production_ _Assistant_:  
Yu-tu Tang _aka_ Deng Yaozu<br>

_Screenplay_: Tang Shu Shuen<br>

_Director_ _of_ _Photography_ _(Interiors HK):_  
Subrata Mitra<br>

_2nd_ _Unit_ _Photography_ _(Exteriors):_  
Chi Ho-che _aka_ Qi Hexi<br>

_Additional_ _Photography_: Hal Harrison, Les Blank<br>

_Special_ _Assistant_: Shi Meiying<br>

_Lighting_: Liu Pei<br>

_Editors_: Les Blank, C. C. See _aka_ Si Shi<br>

_Decoration_: Lau Wen _aka_ Norman/Luo Wen<br>

_Set_ _Decorator_: Pau Tien-ming _aka_ Bao Tianming<br>

_Props_: Chang Yi _aka_ Zhang Yi<br>

_Costumes_: Liu Chieh-hui _aka_ Liu Yin-fei/Liu Xianhui<br>

_Wardrobe_: Wu Chiun<br>

_Make_-u_p:_ Sung Hsiao-kiang _aka_ Song Xiaojiang<br>

_Titles_ _& Optical:_ Consolidated Film Industries

_Music_ _Composed_ _and_ _Performed by_:  
Liu Tsun-yuen _aka_ Lu Zhenyuan

_Panegyric_ _and_ _wine_ _verses_ _composed_ _by:_  
H.L. Sung

_Captain_ _Yang’s_ _poem_ _composed_ _by:_ Dr S.S. Kwong

_English_ _Titles_: Xue Erwen

_Sound and_ _Mandarin_ _Dubbing_:  
Ryders Sound Services, Inc.

_Sound_ _Effects_: Del Harris

_Cast_:

Lisa Lu _(Madam Tung)_

Roy Chiao Hung _(Captain Yang)_

Hilda Chou Hsuan _(Dong Weiling, the daughter)_

Li Ying _(Old Zhang)_

Wen Hsiu _aka_ Man Sau/Wen Xiu  
_(Grandmother Dong)_

Liang Jui _aka_ Liang Yui/Liang Rui _(monk)_

Wan Li _aka_ Man Lei

Wu Chiun _aka_ Wu Cun

Tang Shu-shen _aka_ Shu Chen

Chiu Szu-wen _aka_ Zhao Siyun

Tang Shu-chan _aka_ Shu Zan

Chang Yu-chuan _aka_ Zhang Yuquan

Hung Kao

Wu Po _aka_ Hu Bo

Jojo Cheung

Hong Kong 1968

95 mins

Digital 4K (restoration)

Restored in 4K in 2025 by M+ at Silver Salt Restoration laboratory, from a 35mm print preserved by University of California, Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive and from a 35mm print preserved by BFI National Archive.

The restoration of _The Arch_ is made possible by the support of CHANEL, M+’s Major Partner.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbOTY5NTU5NzA1XX0=
-->