
‘What is a cult film? A cult film is one which has a passionate following but does not appeal to everybody. Just because a movie is a cult movie does not automatically guarantee quality. Some cult films are very bad. Others are very, very good. Some make an awful lot of money at the box office. Others make no money at all. Some are considered quality films. Others are exploitation.’ From 1988 to 2000 _Moviedrome_ was presented by Alex Cox and then Mark Cousins. Across that time, more than 200 features were shown, and generations of movie fans and filmmakers would be informed and inspired by the selection, alongside the wit and wisdom of the introductions that preceded each screening. _Moviedrome_ was a portal into the world of weird and wonderful cinema. This two-month season features some of the most notable titles screened and wherever possible they are preceded by the original televised introduction.  
**Nick Freand Jones, season curator and producer  of _Moviedrome_**

**Alex Cox:** _Diva_ is just the sort of film that American movie critics love: big on style and short on substance. And, of course, because it’s French. It’s the kind of film that gets called ‘scintillating’, or 'fabulous, frothy fun’. It doesn’t, however, have any real passion, nor any acting worthy of note. It doesn’t have a theme or any real direction, but what it does have is art direction. It’s the only film I’ve ever seen where a whole sequence has been designed around a packet of cigarettes – the colour of the walls, the set decoration, the costumes, everything exists to complement a packet of Gitanes.

It’s an art director’s film and the name of the art director is Hilton McConnico. Hilton’s film is, I guess, what you’d call a New Wave film. It’s a post-punk, hyper-modern, ultra-realist sort of subject. It’s fresh and shiny, like one of those glum-looking models that stare out at you from the pages of _The Face_. It also features musical selections from the noted opera _La Wally_ – _une de mes favorites_.

A lot of people like _Diva_, which became an instant cult when it opened.

**Alex Cox’s original introduction for _Moviedrome_. Also published in _Moviedrome: The Guide_ (BBC, 1990). With thanks to moviedromer.tumblr.com**  
<br>

**A contemporary review**  
_Diva_ is the first feature by Jean-Jacques Beineix, a former assistant to a number of mainstream French directors. One notes first its contemporaneity – a hyper-realist, post-punk visual style – overlooking, perhaps, the traditions of humanism and genre cinema, the _policier_, in which the film is rooted.

The particular frisson of _Diva_ is to witness contemporary stylishness – the elegance of the Diva in her hotel room, the chic of the supercool hero Gorodish – triumphant over ugliness (the punkish gangsters), corruption (the police chief) or inscrutability (the grasping, blackmailing businessmen). A traditional morality then, in ultramodern garb. But the modernity of Beineix’s style should not be undervalued. Pop Art decors, offbeat locations, selective colours and idiosyncratic compositions are assertively used to create a fantasy world which is only a sidestep from crime-movie realism, itself a stylisation from the pulp thriller.

The plot, which turns and U-turns on a confusion over two, and subsequently three, tape recordings, the various villains would kill for, is a cunning, piece of cinematic adaptation, from a novel by ‘Delacorta’, that calls attention to the importance of sound. In the opening sequence we hear a full-bodied aria over the credits which is abruptly ‘cut’ short when the young mailman Jules switches off the cassette machine on his moped. Beineix also uses silences judiciously interposed between scenes of dialogue and tyre-squealing action.

The texture of his images, however, is even richer than that of the soundtrack, for here Beineix has boldly attempted to integrate two environments – a film familiar Paris, the Place de la Concorde, the Tuilleries, and a newer, more vulgar, Paris of parking lots, wrecked warehouses and pinball arcades. Each milieu is its own significant setting and the interaction of backgrounds is just as unnerving as the tensions between the opposing characters.

That the film should be so engaging and amusing is attributable rather to the increasingly improbable action. In this sense the dramatic structure is strikingly close to the operatic form and it is entirely appropriate that the film should end in an opera-house with the Diva singing an aria from _La Wally_.

Beineix acknowledges opera as a key influence on his work, preferring its heightened demonstrative action and stylised settings to conventional film realism. In his use of classical music in modernist settings Beineix has been compared to the young Godard. The most apposite cross-reference would be to _A bout de souffle_. Both films display their affection for Hollywood cinema and Americana through a gangster movie plot and the relationship between a Frenchman and an American woman, and both represent a distinctive departure from the ossifying conventions of the national cinema from which they spring. Such a comparison marks _Diva_ as an auspicious debut from a refreshingly original talent.  
**Martyn Auty, _Sight and Sound_, Autumn 1982**
<br><br>

**Diva**<br>

_Director:_ Jean-Jacques Beineix<br>

_©/Production Companies:_ Films Galaxie, Greenwich Film Production<br>

_In association with:_ Antenne 2<br>

_Producer:_ Irène Silberman<br>

_Production Supervisor:_ Ulli Pickard<br>

_Production Co-ordinators:_ Jacqueline Benloulou, Maurice Cadaze<br>

_Production Manager:_ Catherine Mazières<br>

_Location Manager:_ Gérard Marcireau<br>

_Assistant Directors:_ Gérard Pujolar,

Patrick Halpine, Jean-Jacques Albert<br>

_Screenplay:_ Jean-Jacques Beineix,

Jean van Hamme<br>

_Dialogue:_ Jean-Jacques Beineix<br>

_Based on the novel by:_ Delacorta

_Director of Photography:_ Philippe Rousselot

_Camera Operator:_ Dominique Brenguier

_Stills Photography:_ Dominique Le Strat

_Special Effects:_ Paul Trielli

_Editors:_ Marie-Josèphe Yoyotte, Monique Prim

_Production Designer:_ Hilton McConnico

_Assistant Production Designer:_ Carlos Conti

_Costumes:_ Claire Fraisse

_Make-up:_ Judith Gayo

_Music Composed and Conducted by:_  
Vladimir Cosma

_Sound Recording:_ Jean-Pierre Ruh

_Sound Re-recording:_ Jacqueline Porel,

Catherine Leygonie

_Supervising Sound Editor:_ Gina Pignier

_Sound Editor:_ Claude Villand

_Sound Effects:_ Jean-Pierre Lelong

_Subtitles:_ Anne Brav, Hal Brav

_Stunt Co-ordinator:_ Michel Norman

_Cast:_

Frédéric Andrëi _(Jules)_

Roland Bertin _(Simon Weinstadt)_

Richard Bohringer _(Gorodish)_

Gérard Darmon _(Spic)_

Chantal Deruaz _(Nadia Kalonsky)_

Jacques Fabbri _(Inspector Jean Saporta)_

Patrick Floersheim _(Mortier)_

Thuy An Luu _(Alba)_

Jean-Jacques Moreau _(Krantz)_

Dominique Pinon _(Le Curé)_

Anny Romand _(Paula)_

Wilhelmenia Wiggins Fernandez  
_(Cynthia Hawkins, the Diva)_

Raymond Aquilon

Eugène Berthier

Gérard Chaillou

Andrée Champeaux

Nathalie Dalian

Laurence Darpy

Michel Debrane

Etienne Draber

Laure Duthilleul

Nane Germon

Gebriel Gobin

Jim-Adhi Limas

Louisette Malapert

Dimo Mally

Veneta Mally

Alain Marcel

Isabelle Mergault

Marthe Moudiki-Moreau

Jean-Luc Porraz

Bernard Robin

Yann Roussel

Brigitte Simonin

Jean-Louis Vitrac

Tania Zabaloieff

France 1981©

117 mins

Digital 4K (restoration)

New 4K restoration from the original negative by Studiocanal with the support of the CNC

Moviedrome transmission date: 22 May 1988
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTY2NTgyOTQwMF19
-->