<![endif]-->

‘The thing is, it’s hard for me to analyse what I do because I’m always in the moment and trying to move forward.’ Kathryn Bigelow has come to London by train from Paris, where she was being honoured by the Cinémathèque française. ‘I met Costa-Gavras,’ the Cinémathèque’s president, best known as the director of _Z_ (1969). ‘He’s a hero of mine, and I told him, “You invented the political thriller.” You couldn’t do this movie if it hadn’t been for him.’ ‘This movie’ is _A House of Dynamite_, Bigelow’s first in eight years, and the most sheerly compelling of her career, moving forward with the relentlessness of a rocket.

Bigelow’s career has in fact been a series of forward moves: from art into film, from high style into realism, from fiction into journalism – and indeed, from stasis into motion, spectacle into narrative. Her first feature _The Loveless_ (1981, co-directed with Monty Montgomery), a postmodern biker movie that makes a fetish of 1950s Americana while constantly evoking its violent undertow, ‘was really an effort to suspend the narrative. If it were a piece of music it would be one note. Whereas shooting _A House of Dynamite_ was like four-dimensional chess.’ A nuclear intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) is bearing down on Chicago and the US military and political leadership have about 18 minutes to try to stop it and to decide on a response. We see the same 18 minutes play out three times, focusing on three sets of characters, but with a great deal of overlap since everyone in the film is in near-constant communication with one another.

‘It was incredibly complex to shoot, and the script [by Noah Oppenheim] was meticulous.’ The momentum is sustained through the repetitions as each one introduces new dimensions to the story. Deeply researched and shot without gloss, _A House of Dynamite_ is the culmination of all of Bigelow’s forward moves, the central pivot in which was _The Hurt Locker_ (2008), a bomb-disposal drama set in Iraq, in which her newfound yen for realism, and for journalism, came together for the first time. She herself calls it a ‘breathtaking transition’; it was also a kind of comeback after _K-19: The Widowmaker_ (2002), a starry and expensive Cold War thriller, set aboard a Russian submarine, that underperformed at the box office. Made on a much lower budget, and shot on 16mm, primarily in Jordan, _The Hurt Locker_ won the Best Picture Oscar, and, for Bigelow personally, the Directing Oscar. She was the first woman to win the award, and the last for more than a decade, but she has never made a big thing of it, whereas she talks about being screened at the Cinémathèque as ‘surreal, an out of body experience’.

The two films that followed _The Hurt Locker_, _Zero Dark Thirty_ (2012), about the US military’s hunt for Osama Bin Laden, and _Detroit_ (2017), set during the riots of 1967, were in the same vein, and based on historical events, and while _A House of Dynamite_ is speculative, it is likewise based on intimate knowledge of America’s defence establishment. What is new within this phase of Bigelow’s career is _A House of Dynamite_’s narrative intricacy, its rapid cycling between locations and extensive use of telecommunications. It would not be inaccurate to say that the film’s true location is the ether. In the third act, as the president barrels through Washington DC, we barely notice the sight of his motorcade, and the constant disruption involved in keeping it moving, because the main drama is taking place somewhere on the electromagnetic spectrum; and yet the sequence has the power it possesses because the motorcade is as real as can be. The principals, Bigelow tells me, were in the vehicles, not in the studio.

Still, although _A House of Dynamite_ is highly plausible, and although it is new and distinctively of the 2020s, it is also of a piece with Bigelow’s films before _The Hurt Locker_ and her shift to realism, most obviously _Strange Days_ (1995), which was, after all, an apocalyptic prophecy of the technological near future. For all that she is keen to present _A House of Dynamite_ as an urgent ‘cautionary tale’ for a generation (or two) who have grown up since the Cold War, in relative ignorance of the possibility of instant nuclear annihilation, it can be seen as a vindication of _Strange Days_’ predictions of an ‘increasingly mediated’ environment, as she described it at the time. The main characters in _A House of Dynamite_ experience the world almost exclusively through screens – we never actually see the ICBM – while they are constantly being looked at through them in turn, and frequently having to authenticate themselves, at the mercy of their devices. The stakes are unusually high, but they are just like us.

Perversely or otherwise, Bigelow’s films from _Blue Steel_ onwards betray a fascination with the protocols of the straight world alongside the desire for unmediated experience manifested by countercultural figures like _Point Break_’s Bodhi; indeed, some of her most extreme thrill-seekers, such as Jeremy Renner’s character in _The Hurt Locker_, are feeding their need from within the most tightly routinised parts of the machine.

_A House of Dynamite_ may seem some way distant from these concerns, but its characters are the most governed by protocol of any in Bigelow’s career, as well as the most distanced from real, unmediated experience. And by showing the astounding efforts we have collectively made, as a species, to make nuclear annihilation an ever-present possibility, it is also in keeping with the rest of her films in tracing the lineaments of the death drive beneath modern civilisation’s apparently rational surface. Her response to this? ‘I don’t know, it’s a real reach.’

Henry K. Miller, _Sight and Sound_, December 2025


<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE1OTUzNjE4NTZdfQ==
-->