
_+ intro by Grace Barber-Plentie, BFI Festivals Film Programmer_

Playing Edna Buxton/Denise Waverly, a songwriter whose career is closely based on that of Carole King, Illeanna Douglas brings such a winningly tipsy verve to her character’s pursuits – from her singing (although dubbed), to the Brill Building hackwork she marks time with – that we can’t help loving them too.

For King, the true-life payoff was her 1971 solo LP _Tapestry_, which became the best-selling record of the mid-70s. Actually, the girl-groups that King started out writing for have far more hip cachet today than the introspective West Coast singer-songwriter genre, a boom started by King’s massive success. Yet not only is the film titled after Waverly’s equivalent to _Tapestry_, her LP _Grace of My Heart_, but this record’s implied artistic triumph gives the movie its closure. That this ending convinces and pleases us is a testament not just to Douglas’ resplendent smile, but to the calm, uncynical breadth of Allison Anders’ generosity towards every warring style within the music industry. For even those inclined to prefer early 60s three-minute symphonies-for-kids (where King began) to the well-heeled mid-70s adult self-regard of a Carly Simon (which King unleashed) are allowed to retain their sense that an artist’s achievement of total control will entail loss as much as gain.

Wim Wenders may once have been Anders’ guru, but now it’s Scorsese, so intelligent about compromise with the Hollywood machine. Better yet, classic Hollywood ‘women’s picture’ melodrama has become Anders’ lode-star in a way not evident in _Gas Food Lodging_ and _Mi vida loca_. As an examination of the value of creative compromise – and of power, freedom, priorities, support and other feminist concerns – only the director’s own story betters King’s.

Anders has never been the most adept storyteller: characters often stand around spouting back story, and Edna’s need for an unsatisfactory love to be on the rebound from – between Caszatt and Phillips – is dabbed into the plot very awkwardly. Nor has she the slightest interest in giving her male characters more than one dimension. Though great fun while on-screen, John Turturro’s Millner – ostensibly the film’s moral hero, for his understated supportiveness – is little more than a wig, a beard and an accent; Matt Dillon’s Phillips, as an unstable childlike genius, a doomed Brian Wilson figure, seem misconceived from the outset – wised up 90s moviegoers will be willing Edna to stay away from him. But then Anders’ women are all so characterful, smart, and self-sufficient (even Brit-poppet Patsy Kensit acquires a certain depth) that it’s a mystery why they don’t simply make do with one another.

However, the real triumph is how the music is dealt with. When Edna and Cheryl realise that squeaky-clean girl idol Kelly Porter (Bridget Fonda) is not the brainless deb her publicity makes out, but a tormented secret lesbian we’re able to watch her recording ‘My Secret Love’: this is a stunning portrait in subjective emotion – she sings it direct to her lover, who sits out in the mixing booth beside the unwitting (male) producer, who simply (‘objectively’) hears the song as another brilliant but trivial hit aimed at silly teens.

This sets _us_ up for our appropriate double response to Edna’s own performance of her composition ‘God Give Me Strength’. Singing to an audience of one – she’s auditioning for future producer-husband Phillips – with a song that opens up on the miseries of her own recent life (‘I’m only human, I want him, I want him to hurt’), she hunches over in total concentration, rocking clumsily from foot to foot: she has to convince him (and us) professionally, as well as being true to the contradictory feelings she has about events – her unrequited love for the married Murray – that only we have witnessed.

The music, in other words, has to carry a remarkable double burden. Firstly, it’s the soundtrack-to-a-life inner-voice commentary on the events that unfold: this device was first heard when the massive stomp of The Ronettes’ ‘Be My Baby’ kicked Scorsese’s _Mean Streets_ into life. But it also arises out of the experiences and observations of these various bed-sharing songwriter teams: ‘Be My Baby’ was by Jeff Barry and Ellie Greenwich, another model for Howard and Denise (the first being Gerry Goffin with King, the _third_ Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil). To reflect this, we have to be in on the apparent _creation_ of songs: existing ones won’t do, with their freight of potentially inappropriate resonance. Which lays a great responsibility on the behind-the-scenes pasticheurs providing these songs – including Goffin, Burt Bacharach, Elvis Costello and even Leslie Gore (on whom Kelly Porter may be based).

That these backroom workers don’t disappoint is perhaps the main reason why _Grace of My Heart_ succeeds where many ‘modern’ musicals (from _New York, New York_ to _Absolute Beginners_) have failed: the different levels of delivery of meaning interact, supporting, extending and critiquing one another. But it’s also down to Anders, who comes up with what she’s best at: scene after scene of lively, funny, unexpected woman-to-woman moments.  
**Mark Sinker, _Sight and Sound_, March 1997**
<br><br>


<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE5MTg1Mjg1MDNdfQ==
-->