<![endif]-->

**SPOILER WARNING** The following notes give away some of the plot.

Near the end of the 154-minute running time of Alejandro González Iñárritu’s exhilarating debut _Amores_ _perros_, an old man, sitting by the side of the road, takes time out to look up at the sky. The character, El Chivo/The Goat (Emilio Echevarría), is an ex-revolutionary down on his luck who’s been contracted to assassinate a businessman, and he’s waiting beside a telegraph pole outside his target’s office in Mexico City, staking things out. But for the moment, El Chivo looks up and squints, the sun darting behind the pole, then out again, its fresh light flickering on the old man’s weathered face.

It’s a masterful and exquisite moment – one that lets you catch your breath and reflect on the street-level urgency of the previous two hours. An ambitious multi-plotted portrait of overlapping lives in contemporary Mexico City, _Amores_ _perros_ rarely relaxes its grip. Its opening view of the city is as an accelerated blur, glimpsed from the window of a speeding car that’s about to crash; its subsequent images are of a place always on the move, teeming with incident, where the collision of coincidence and the irruption of violence are ever present.

This opening car-crash set-piece is the film’s pivotal plot point. _Amores_ _perros_ is divided into three sections, each devoted to otherwise unconnected characters whose lives are affected by the crash. Unemployed teenager Octavio (Gael García) heads up the first, alongside his brother Ramiro (Marco Pérez) and Ramiro’s wife Susana (Vanessa Bauche). In part this episode plays out like a clammy domestic melodrama – in the cramped, overheated confines of their small family flat, Octavio falls in love with Susana and vows to take her away from her abusive husband. But in order to pay for this, he takes to entering his beloved Rottweiler Cofi in the illegal dogfights regularly organised by an underworld connection.

These sequences have already earned the film a degree of notoriety in the UK. A title card at the beginning might reassure us that no animals were harmed during the film’s making, but the dogfights are still vivid, fierce affairs (though arguably it’s the aftermath that’s most telling – glimpses of the dead dogs, their coats glossy with blood, being dragged off like hulks of meat by their indifferent owners, or of those barely alive being splashed into action to fight again by handfuls of soapy, blood-red water).

But while these sequences are gruelling, they’re not gratuitous. As in Robert Bresson’s _Au hasard Balthazar_, here animal suffering is an index of human cruelty. (The parallel is made explicit towards the end when two brothers determined to kill one another are chained to either side of a room and strain at their binds like dogs held in check before a fight.) Dogs get a rough deal in _Amores_ _perros_: whereas the first section sees them tear at one another’s throats in order to enrich their owners, the second features a pampered pet pooch Richie belonging to Spanish model Valeria (Goya Toledo) which disappears under the polished floorboards of its owner’s new flat where it nearly starves to death while being gnawed at by rats. Like Octavio, Valeria is involved in the crash that opens the movie – and González Iñárritu charts her slow recovery in the flat her lover Daniel (Álvaro Guerrero) has bought her. If the first section unfurled at a fiery, breakneck pace, this one is more of a slow-burner – although no less intense. A mocking echo of happier times, Richie can be heard yelping occasionally, scurrying underneath their feet as Daniel and Valeria attempt to figure out what went wrong between them. The segment is a piercing account of a relationship falling apart – and a painstaking exploration of the hold domestic spaces have over us – shot through with a line of dark absurdist humour that brings to mind Buñuel’s treatise on bourgeois entrapment _The Exterminating Angel_, a late entry in the Spanish director’s Mexican period.

A sprawling saga of lives in a violent urban environment, with flashes of self-conscious narrative (the film shuttles back and forth in time) and overlapping plotlines, _Amores_ _perros_ will inevitably invite comparisons with Quentin Tarantino’s first two movies. In fact, González Iñárritu seems to be goading us to make them: in the opening scene, which takes place inside Octavio’s car as it hurtles through the city, Octavio’s friend attempts to stem the blood from a wound Cofi has just sustained much as Harvey Keitel extemporised first-aid on Tim Roth in the back of their getaway car in _Reservoir Dogs_; later there’s a playful parody of the torture scene from that film. But if the comparison works, it’s only superficially: _Amores_ _perros’_ moments of violence are forceful but fleeting (when El Chivo shoots dead a businessman in a restaurant, all we see is a trickle of blood bubbling and thickening on a hotplate), and despite the occasional reversal of the film’s chronology, it’s largely stylistically unaffected.

The final section follows El Chivo, who’s been glimpsed throughout the first two episodes as an impassive witness to events. Living in a one-room squat and spending his days wandering the streets followed by the troupe of dogs he cares for, he seems to have retreated from the world some time ago. A former revolutionary, his idealism has long since flagged – when a corrupt police commander asks him why he doesn’t wear his glasses any more, his resigned reply is: ‘If God wants me to see blurry I’ll see blurry.’ Concentrating on El Chivo’s attempt to set up one last hit – and his efforts to find out more about the daughter who believes him dead – the film’s final reel also catches up with Octavio, Ramiro and Susana. There’s a courageously bleak edge to the turn of events (‘To make God laugh, tell him your plans,’ Susana says of Octavio’s hopes), and it’s tempting to read a political critique underlying the harrowing portrait of a place that seems to drive its inhabitants to the edge of despair. González Iñárritu himself has stated that the film illustrates the legacy of 71 years of single-party rule (which ended in December 2000): a society where the chasm between rich and poor is ever-growing and crime seems the only means of subsistence for millions of people. Yet the film snatches hope where it can – and it’s perhaps González Iñárritu’s greatest achievement that, after all its grim stretches, _Amores_ _perros_ comes to a close with a note of muted optimism.

Edward Lawrenson, _Sight and Sound_, May 2001


<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTI0OTY1OTg2N119
-->