
This film was such an inspiration to me when I first saw it. It has a lot to do with what was coming out of the speakers. So much of it is shot silently on Super 8, so the sound had to be created from scratch. That’s the way I prefer to work. But with this film, I’ve never been able to separate the sound design and Simon Fisher Turner’s brilliant score.  
**Mark Jenkin**

**A contemporary review**  
Derek Jarman’s feature film work has become increasingly experimental in form, particularly since the silence imposed on him in the early 80s by lack of funding. _The Angelic Conversation_ (1985), _The Last of England_ (1987) and now _The Garden_ all reflect Jarman’s frustration with the conventions of mainstream cinema and a new-found confidence in allowing his material to dictate its own form. This is due in part to the plain fact that what Jarman now needs to express can no longer be contained in a narrative format. In the 70s, his films were public celebrations of his homosexuality, a necessary stance at the time which excluded his own more private emotions. In the 80s, Jarman began to turn inwards, a tendency reinforced perhaps by the death of his father and the onset of AIDS. Home-movie footage of Jarman as a child with his family begins to appear in his films almost as a recuperation of ‘the good’ in the context of a film career dominated until then by aggressive, violent and sadistic themes and images.

_The Garden_ is an explosive combination of scenes plumbing a variety of loves, hates and desires, all welded together by the story of the Passion. The film, among other things, is about Christianity, the media, police brutality, advertising, gay love and repression, the family, old age, AIDS and, in the end, Jarman himself. Biblical characters are fragmented so that Christ appears – once in a marvellous scene in the present day, on a road cutting through a desolate landscape – but is represented mainly by two gay lovers; similarly Tilda Swinton is an angel, a beachcomber and the Madonna. A young man in drag is Mary Magdalene, while the police in an extremely brutal scene become the torturing soldiers of Pontius Pilate.

The film exemplifies Jarman’s idea of a personal cinema, which previously existed only in the shorter Super-8 ‘home-movies’ he began in 1970 but which has now moved to centre stage. Interestingly, Jarman’s own cinematic ideas have gained from the imagistic camerawork of younger gay experimental filmmakers like John Maybury, Cerith Wyn-Evans, Chris Hughes and Richard Heslop, so that fast-cutting, pixillation and a sweeping camera have replaced what was once a much more static aesthetic, focused on tableaux rather than the energy and excitement of manipulating the film surface itself. As in _The Last of England_, _The Garden_ is constructed around Jarman’s own persona as dreamer/fantasist/consciousness. The film is a dream in which the filmmaker plays or is the central protagonist, as in the ‘trance’ films of such American avant-gardists of the 1940s as Kenneth Anger, Gregory Markopoulos and Maya Deren. But its most immediate and perhaps conscious debts are to Cocteau (_The Testament of Orpheus_ and _Orphée_ itself), Pasolini (_The Gospel According to St Matthew_) and Powell (_The Life and Death of Colonel Blimp_).

Yet of all Jarman’s features it is also the most allegorical, using the Passion of Jesus Christ to articulate not only emotional states but the nature of life itself, a Christian view by any account in which spiritual survival against the onslaught of corruption is paramount, where personal salvation is all. The style is quintessential Jarman in its overwrought tableaux, montage editing and bricolage ‘narrative’. Images and motifs recur: of fire (a Jungian symbol which first appeared in the home movies of the early 1970s); the passive gay male couple (first met in Angel and Sphinx in _Jubilee_ and most intensely celebrated in his sadly neglected _The Angelic Conversation_); the splitting and excessive idealisation of women, particularly of late through the iconic presence of Tilda Swinton; and the indictment of modern society through a recuperation of the past, typically a pre-capitalist one, the period of the English Renaissance (Shakespeare and John Dee).

_The Garden_ can be seen as the final film in an unwitting trilogy on the subject of the moral, social and spiritual decline of England which began with _Jubilee_ in the late 70s, was followed by _The Last of England_ in the late 80s, and ends with _The_ _Garden_’s intensely private and painful allegory. The three films trace, almost tragically, Jarman’s shifting perspective from a largely public and social critique in which historical bonds were imaginatively tied through the ever-present figure of John Dee in _Jubilee_, to the bleak, fragmented and paranoid avant-gardism of _The Last of England_, and now a coming to rest in which hope is balanced against despair, love against anger, fear and loathing against peace and reconciliation.  
**Michael O’Pray, _Monthly Film Bulletin_, January 1991**
<br><br>

**The Garden**  
_Director_: Derek Jarman  
_Production Company_: Basilisk  
_In association with_: Channel Four, British Screen, ZDF – Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen, Uplink  
_Producer_: James Mackay  
_Production Manager_: Nick Searle  
_Production Manager (Studio)_: Sarah Swords  
_Production Assistant_: Jo Scarlett Coriat  
_Assistant Directors_: Matthew Evans,  David Lewis, Ian Francis  
_Casting_: Debbie McWilliams, Michelle Guish  
_Casting (Extras)_: Simon Turner  
_Director of Photography_: Christopher Hughes  
_Additional Photography_: David Lewis,  James MacKay, Nick Searle  
_Camera Operators_: Steve Farrer, Richard Heslop, Christopher Hughes, Derek Jarman  
_Editor_: Peter Cartwright  
_Production Designers_: Derek Brown,  Christopher Hobbs  
_Scenic Artist_: Annie Lapaz  
_Costume Designer_: Annie Symons  
_Make-up_: Thelma Mathews  
_Music_: Simon Fisher Turner  
_Music Performed by_: Martyn Bates, Dean Broderick, Glen Fox, Paul Jayasinha, Andrew Okrezeja, Melanie Pappenhiem, Ian Shaw, David Sinclair, Brian Springbacrou, El Tito, Hugh Webb, Alexander Balanescu, Tony Hinnigan, Jonathan Carney, Kate Musker, Mark Horn  
_String Arrangements_: Dean Broderick  
_Music Recording_: Marvin Black, Richard Preston  
_Synclavier Operator_: Andy Kennedy  
_Sound Recording_: Gary Desmond  
_Sound Re-recording_: Peter Maxwell  
_Sound Editor_: Nigel Holland  
_Foley Artists_: Bill Garlick, Beryl Mortimer  
_Adviser_: Simon Goldberg

**Cast**  
Tilda Swinton _(Madonna)_  
Johnny Mills, Kevin Collins _(lovers)_  
Pete Lee-Wilson _(Devil)_  
Spencer Leigh _(Mary Magdalene/Adam)_  
Jody Graber _(young boy)_  
Roger Cook _(Christ)_  
Jessica Martin _(singer)_  
Philip Macdonald _(Joseph/Jesus)_  
Dawn Archibald _(nature spirit)_  
Michael Gough _(voice-overs)_  
Maribelle La Manchega _(Spanish dancer)_  
Orlando _(Pontius Pilate)_  
Mike Tezcan, Matthew Wilde _(policemen)_  
Milo Bell  
Vernon Dobtcheff  
Leslie Randall

UK-Germany-Japan 1990  
92 mins  
Digital

The screening on Wed 1 Apr will be introduced by artist Sarah Wood
<br><br>
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTIxMzc4NTI5MThdfQ==
-->